Here's how NPR will report the 2024 election results

toggle caption Jeff Kowalsky/AFP via Getty Images

For more 2024 election coverage from the NPR Network head to our live updates page.

Voters have been voting, ballots will be counted, and soon results will start to come in. But how will races be called on election night? Determining a winner in any of the thousands of races across the U.S., from ballot measures on issues like abortion rights and voting, to the presidential race and all the congressional, state and local races in between, is a big job. That’s why NPR partners with The Associated Press — and has for many years — to ensure that races are called accurately.

Sponsor Message

The Associated Press has been calling races for a long time. The organization’s decision desk has called races since 1848 and even now, more than 170 years later, it keeps those calls pretty simple. Here’s how the AP explains its race-calling process:

Race calls are based on provable facts, primarily from the AP’s vote count, which is compiled from state and local election offices around the nation.

As more and more ballots are tabulated starting on election night, the AP will monitor the incoming vote at the county level and analyze who is in the lead and what areas the votes are coming from.

At the same time, the AP tries to determine throughout the night how many ballots are uncounted and from what areas.

Once AP has an idea of how many ballots are outstanding versus how many have been counted, it can start to tabulate the likelihood of a certain winner being victorious in a certain contest based on a lot of different factors: where the ballots that are outstanding are coming from, what the makeup of those communities looks like and even how the individual chose to vote.

For NPR’s part, once the AP calls a race, we will alert our broadcast and digital audiences on our special coverage and live blog and ensure that our hundreds of member stations also have access to that information. We will use AP’s data to populate our election results pages so viewers can keep track in real time.



Sponsor Message

How does AP call races when not all votes have been counted?

Sometimes, races might be called without all — or even most — of the votes counted. How is that possible? The Associated Press explains that it uses that same calculation of ballots, external factors and other data to inform its decisions.

In almost all cases, races can be called well before 100% of the votes have been counted. The AP’s team of election journalists and analysts will call a race as soon as a clear winner can be determined. That may sound obvious, but it is the guiding principle that drives the organization’s election race-calling process.

The AP’s race calls are not predictions and are not based on speculation. They are declarations based on an analysis of vote results and other election data that one candidate has emerged as the winner and that no other candidate in the race will be able to overtake the winner once all the votes have been counted.

It sounds simple, right? The AP won’t call races until “a clear winner can be determined.” But that doesn’t always require all of the votes for every precinct for every race. Sometimes it’s all about the math: Can this candidate feasibly win with the votes outstanding in the places they are yet to be counted? And that raises another, really important point. The AP — and therefore NPR — will not project races. The organization will wait until it has certainty to call races and that is why its race calls are trusted by hundreds of news organizations, including NPR. Because the AP waits until there is surety, even if it means waiting just a bit longer to be sure.

On an ethical note, NPR will not make race calls just because a candidate declares victory, nor will NPR use a concession speech or statement to solely follow a race call either. That is true of The Associated Press as well:

Sponsor Message

AP race calls are never made based on lobbying from campaigns or political parties or announcements made by other news organizations, or on candidate victory speeches. Although it will never call a winner based on a concession speech, in some cases, a concession is the final piece of the puzzle in confirming that there will be no recount in a close race.

While election night is the start of these race calls, it likely will not be the end. Races will continue to be called until a winner can be determined in the presidential election and race calls will be tabulated to determine balance of power in the Senate and the House of Representatives. NPR will cover all major race calls and provide ongoing coverage on air and online of just how the 2024 election shakes out.
Election Day guide: What you need to know as you wait for results

toggle caption Jeff Kowalsky/AFP via Getty Images

For more 2024 election coverage from the NPR Network head to our live updates page.

The turbulent 2024 campaign has reached its end.

Tens of millions of voters have already cast general election ballots, and millions more will do the same on Tuesday’s Election Day, before polls close and the reporting of results begins.

Here are some things to keep in mind throughout Election Day and beyond:

First ... do you still need to vote? More than 20 states offer same-day voter registration on Election Day. You can double-check your polling place and any identification requirements before heading out to cast a ballot.

You may still have time to fix mail ballot errors. Almost all states offer online ballot tracking, and for voters who are alerted to issues with their mail ballots, many states allow voters to fix those errors beyond Election Day.

Sponsor Message

Be mindful of rumors and baseless claims. It’s a charged political atmosphere, and rumors about election malfeasance and fake videos can take off online before trusted sources have a chance to correct the record. Here are some tips to avoid sharing election misinformation.

Remember also that elections are run by humans — many of whom are volunteers — and humans sometimes make mistakes, especially when they’re under pressure and scrutiny. Every Election Day, there are isolated issues at polling places; they likely don’t mean anything nefarious is going on.

Campaigns are focused on seven swing states. Polling averages have shown a dead heat in the seven states that are likely to decide the presidential election. Here are the final poll closing times for those states, in chronological order:



7 p.m. ET – Georgia

7:30 p.m. ET – North Carolina

8 p.m. ET – Pennsylvania

9 p.m. ET – Arizona, Michigan, Wisconsin

10 p.m. ET – Nevada

For all poll closing times, head here.

Also remember that while Vice President Harris and former President Donald Trump battle for the top of the ticket, there are independent and third-party presidential candidates on the ballot in these seven swing states whose tallies could affect the outcomes.

As results start coming in, patience is needed. It takes a while to accurately count millions of ballots with many contests on each. Election officials will always stress that the results that are reported on election night are unofficial and that it is media organizations who are calling races.

Sponsor Message

NPR relies on The Associated Press for race calls, and the AP has a long track record of accuracy. Here’s more on how the AP makes those decisions. The single biggest factor in a race call is how close a contest is.

A candidate who appears to be “leading” can be overtaken by another candidate. A number of factors affect how quickly votes can be tallied.

Mail ballots, for instance, come in envelopes that need to be opened, and have signatures or other identifying information to verify. Some states, including the swing states of Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, don’t allow these mail ballots to be preprocessed for tabulation until Election Day, further slowing down counting. And Arizona’s massive Maricopa County is expecting hundreds of thousands of mail ballots to be dropped off by voters on Election Day.

Since there are partisan divides in voter methods and the geographic locations those votes come from, results will shift. Of course, all votes are of equal value; some just get added to the overall tally later.

The terms “blue shift” and “red mirage” really entered the lexicon in 2020. Those describe a phenomenon that played out on the Electoral College map — when mail ballots, cast primarily by Democratic voters, were added to tallies in places like Pennsylvania, eroding an early Republican advantage in the presidential election (and becoming a key source of misinformation from Trump).

There have been fewer requests for mail ballots this year, compared with the pandemic election of 2020, so many experts think these partisan shifts will be less pronounced. The nonprofit Protect Democracy released a useful report with its vote count expectations for each of the seven top swing states. The group cited earlier mail ballot deadlines and expanded preprocessing in certain places as other reasons why results may be faster in 2024.

But again, the closeness of a race is the real determining factor in how long it takes to find out who wins.

Just because a candidate declares victory doesn’t mean they won. In 2020, Trump came out on election night and, citing baseless claims of fraud, said, “Frankly, we did win this election.”

Sponsor Message

Trump has not committed to accepting the results of the 2024 race either.

Already, there’s been a surge of litigation around voting rules, with many experts seeing lawsuits from Trump’s Republican allies as setting the groundwork for potential election challenges.

Elections aren’t done yet. Again, the results reported on election night are unofficial. Election officials will verify and finalize those tallies before certification. For the presidential race, the Electoral College process has several steps leading to Inauguration Day.

And what about recounts? Each state has its own rules — and Arizona, for instance, has raised its threshold for automatic recounts from 0.1% to 0.5% for statewide contests. (For context, in 2020, Trump lost Arizona by 0.3%.)

Recounts are very rare, though, and it’s rarer still for recounts to reverse an outcome.
Trump and allies have primed supporters to falsely believe he has no chance of losing

toggle caption Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images

For more 2024 election coverage from the NPR Network head to our live updates page.

It’s possible former President Donald Trump will win the election — and also quite possible he loses. But many in Trump’s orbit keep falsely telling his supporters the only way that happens is because of cheating.

Polling indicates a competitive race in seven battleground states that will decide if Trump or Vice President Harris is the next president, states where voters’ political and demographic makeups mean there are no guaranteed winners.

Sponsor Message

Trump still insists he did not lose the 2020 election, despite numerous recounts and court cases that did not find evidence of fraud. His 2024 campaign is built on that foundation, telling his supporters the only way to “Make America Great Again” in a second term is to vote so that his victory could be “too big to rig.”

A large part of Trump’s closing message in recent weeks has focused on attacking any outcome other than victory as tainted, illegitimate and fraudulent, with no proof or basis in reality.

He has regularly questioned the legality of Harris’ role as the Democratic presidential nominee, calling President Biden’s decision to end his reelection bid and her subsequent selection under Democratic Party rules a “coup.”

After his supporters launched a failed insurrection attempt at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, Trump has still refused to say if he would accept the results of this election, win or lose.

toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Alongside the Republican National Committee, led by his daughter-in-law Lara Trump, Trump’s legal team has planted the seeds to cry foul in several key states if he loses, like Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Georgia, filing numerous lawsuits seeking to disqualify voters and ballots or demand rule changes they say suppress Republican voters.

Sponsor Message

The final days of the campaign have seen a barrage of baseless claims about voting rules, possible election outcomes and Trump’s chances to win from a constellation of his family, friends and faithful associates.

Social media site X has been home to a proliferation of false fraud claims about the election, and the site’s owner, billionaire Elon Musk, has used his considerable platform to amplify conspiracy theories about ballot counting and other normal election procedures while misleadingly sharing early voting data to claim a “decisive Republican victory.”

On Monday, Trump’s son Donald Trump, Jr. riled up a partially empty arena in North Carolina by urging people to show up to vote en masse so “you don’t give [Democrats] a week to find that magical truck of ballots.”

Trump himself has posted online that “Pennsylvania is cheating” and often dedicates parts of his rambling rallies to accusing his opponents of cheating while bragging about often-overinflated poll numbers.

In Pittsburgh Monday night at his penultimate presidential campaign rally, Trump said he has been given “about a 96.2% chance” of winning Tuesday, of which there is no evidence.

Many factors go into a Trump loss — or win

Polling, election analysts and math suggests Trump does not have a 96.2% chance of winning enough states to be the Electoral College winner. The reason the race is instead very close is not fraud, but rather several potential warning signs with his third presidential campaign and voters’ reaction to it.

In several of the swing states, there are lingering effects from the public and private pressure campaign he exerted to get Republican lawmakers and officials to overturn his 2020 defeat. The 2022 midterms saw several high-profile Trump-backed candidates who embraced the false fraud claims falter in what otherwise should have been a good year for Republicans.

His feuds with Republicans who defended the election results led to a notable loss of support among independent voters and conservatives who oppose his candidacy.

Efforts the RNC undertook to make inroads with nonwhite voters in the last election cycle have been abandoned in favor of beefed-up election integrity teams. As a result, much of the get-out-the-vote operation has been outsourced to inexperienced third parties.

After the Supreme Court overturned the longstanding Roe v. Wade decision that guaranteed a national right to obtain abortion care, Republicans have lost ground with women, especially in states that have passed strict abortion bans in the aftermath of that decision.

Sponsor Message

In many states, Trump’s plea for Republicans to “bank your vote” and participate in early voting appears to have paid off, but election data also shows a sizable share of those voters shifted from Election Day. That could potentially lead to lower Republican turnout Tuesday as part of an overall shift in voter behavior since the pandemic-era 2020 presidential race.

All of these factors could lead to a Trump loss when all the votes are counted, or be footnotes if he wins, but none of them involve the widespread voter fraud he has primed his supporters to be ready for, without cause.
A wild election is coming to a close — and no one is sure how it will end

toggle caption Jacquelyn Martin/AP; Evan Vucci/AP

For more 2024 election coverage from the NPR Network head to our live updates page.

How much could possibly happen in such a short period of time?

The month between the first presidential debate and the Democratic National Convention was arguably the most jaw-dropping in modern U.S. politics — from President Biden’s disastrous debate performance to an assassination attempt on former President Donald Trump to Biden dropping out soon after the Republicans’ convention and Vice President Harris quickly consolidating support among Democrats.

For the better part of a year, perhaps more, this was a race between two very well-known candidates: Trump and Biden. But Harris’ entrance upended all that. Enthusiasm among Democrats went through the roof, in part based on relief that Biden was no longer running and the idea that they had a fresh start.

Sponsor Message

But after a relentless last month of attacks from Trump, his campaign and outside groups supporting him, the race has tightened, according to the polls. Democratic strategists are concerned that if the polling errors from 2016 and 2020 repeat, Trump will win — possibly easily.

There were polling errors in 2022 as well, but those underestimated Democrats’ support rather than Republicans’. Trump, of course, wasn’t on the ballot in the midterms, and his most ardent supporters tend to show up in much bigger numbers when he is.

No one knows what exactly will happen. More than 70 million people have already voted early, and more than double that are likely left to be cast and counted. If the states are as close as expected, a winner might not be declared for days. In 2020, the Associated Press, whom NPR follows for calls, didn’t make its call until the Saturday after Election Day .

In that void before a race call, Trump will likely declare victory and cry fraud. He’s essentially done that for four years, and it’s what he’s been setting the stage for in the closing days of the campaign.

The uncertainty reflects a consequential election, not just for the president, but also for who controls Congress.

Republicans are favored to win the Senate, while the House is up for grabs

A president without full control of Washington’s political levers has almost no chance of passing major legislation, so the outcomes of the White House, Senate and House are all pivotal.

Sponsor Message

Democrats are facing one of the worst Senate maps for a party in modern political history. Republicans are expected to win control of the chamber and need to win just two seats if they lose the White House and one if Trump wins (because a vice president would break ties). Republicans are already favored to flip two seats — in West Virginia and Montana, according to the Cook Political Report .

There are half a dozen more competitive seats that could mirror how the presidential election goes in those states, including Ohio, Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Nevada. Democrats are hoping to make Texas and Florida competitive, but those are reaches.

How many Senate seats Republicans pick up could be critical to how long Democrats are in the minority — and if they have a shot at winning back the chamber two years from now.

There are fewer competitive House seats this year than almost ever before because of redistricting and members of Congress wanting to insulate themselves from difficult and expensive races, but Democrats’ chances of retaking the House have improved in the past month, according to forecasters like Inside Elections.

For control, Democrats need a net gain of four seats. Inside Elections sees a possible range of Democrats winning a net of nine seats to a Republican net pick up of one. So Democrats have a slight advantage for the first time this cycle.

It would be unusual for the House and Senate to go in opposite directions, especially in a presidential year. It has happened, though. Four times since 1934 , a winning presidential candidate’s party lost seats in the Senate and gained in the House, but it hasn’t happened since 1984.

In that same time frame, the losing party in the presidential election twice gained in the House but shed Senate seats. In fact, Republicans did exactly that in 2020, gaining 13 House seats, but losing three in the Senate when Biden won the White House.

Sponsor Message

In the presidential election, who most represents “change” could be a deciding factor

Change is a powerful force in politics, but Americans appear split on which candidate most represents change in this election, according to pre-election polling.

Trump has the advantage of not being president during a time when people are pessimistic about prices, immigration and America’s foreign policy.

Harris is the sitting vice president, but she represents change for a lot of people in part because she’s younger than Biden and she’s not Trump; she would also be the first woman, first Black woman and first person of South Asian descent to be president.

Americans are in a bad mood — and have been for some time

Winning the mantle of “change” is especially important when people are so pessimistic about the direction of the country.

Every month for the last 15 years, Americans have said the country is off on the wrong track . That has had a profound effect on U.S. elections. People are more jaded about politics — and its effectiveness — than ever before.

Americans have near-record-low trust in government and its institutions, including health agencies, law enforcement, the Supreme Court and the media.

It’s happening at a time when Americans are also more sorted socially and politically — in the neighborhoods they live in and in the information they consume. “Place,” where someone lives, may be even more determinative than race, gender and ethnic identity in how people vote.

Voters in both parties see threats from the other side to their way of life and to what it means to be American. Conservatives see a culture that is too liberal, weak and enabling. They see a country whose best days are behind it and whose culture and way of life has worsened since the 1950s.

People on the left, on the other hand, see the rights of women, the marginalized and democracy itself as under threat because of leaders who have given license to intolerance and conspiracy.

Sponsor Message

When people are in a bad mood, they tend to blame those in charge, and that’s certainly been the case on the economy and immigration. Despite strong signs of economic recovery since the pandemic, Americans are feeling the pinch of higher-than-pre-pandemic grocery prices and interest rates. The cost of living has gone up and housing is less affordable.

Many Americans are also concerned about the number of migrants crossing the southern U.S. border. All of that has presented challenges for Harris — as it did for Biden before her. It’s led to a distinct advantage for Trump on those two issues.

Harris, on the other hand, holds a larger advantage on women’s reproductive rights, and the gender gap in this election could be the widest in U.S. history.

Trump faces significant challenges on character

Trump has upended American politics in the last decade. Things that Republicans would have never pressed for in decades past, Trump has convinced his followers is the right path forward: less intervention overseas; a reduced commitment to allies; more trade barriers; a softer line toward Russia; praise for dictators and strong men.

His inflammatory rhetoric and race-based grievances have polarized the country. Views of Trump have changed little since he’s come on the political scene. For years, more than half the country has said they have an unfavorable opinion of him.

But he has a loyal — and seemingly immovable — base of support. He has what’s known in politics as “a high floor and a low ceiling.” He got roughly 46% of the vote in 2016 when he won, and 47% of the vote in 2020 when he lost.

His presence in GOP politics has meant that anyone wanting a party nomination for almost any office has to get his blessing, but the negative views of him among many suburban and swing voters has resulted in Republican losses in election cycle after election cycle.

Sponsor Message

He lost the popular vote by 3 million votes in 2016 and by 7 million in 2020. It’s possible that Trump wins this year and becomes the first person to win twice while losing the popular vote twice. (He could win the popular vote this time, though, given that Harris’ leads in national polls are much smaller than Hillary Clinton in 2016 or Biden in 2020.)

Because of the Electoral College — and the swing states being more conservative than the country at large with higher percentages of Republican-leaning white voters without college degrees, especially in the Blue Wall states of Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania — Trump was able to win in 2016 and only narrowly lose in 2020 by just tens of thousands of votes.

Loading...

This election is expected again to be very close and decided by just a handful of states. In addition to those Blue Wall states, four Sun Belt states are the big focus: North Carolina, Georgia, Arizona and Nevada. The reality of the map is that Trump can’t win without winning one of the Blue Wall states, and Harris can’t win without winning one of Pennsylvania, North Carolina or Georgia.

The intersection between their paths is Pennsylvania, which explains why the campaigns have spent $600 million on political ads to try and win there since the beginning of the 2024 cycle. A whopping $1.2 billion has been spent in the state on ads with all races combined, including for Senate, House and farther down ballot. It’s the most money ever spent on one single state.

Polarization won’t end with election night

Harris has tried to make Trump’s words and actions a part of her own messaging this campaign — to remind voters of what she considers to be a threat to democracy.

While that may persuade the moderate Republicans she’s been courting, Trump’s base is locked in, despite his unsubstantiated claims that criminal charges against him are politically motivated, or his insistence that the 2020 election was stolen, a lie that helped fuel the violent siege at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.

Republicans now are more likely to say the country needs a “strong leader,” compared to Democrats, who say it’s most important to have a leader who is “honest and trustworthy,” according to a recent NPR/PBS News/Marist poll.

Sponsor Message

Republicans are also more likely to say the country needs a leader who breaks rules to set things right, and 1 in 3 believe “patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country.” That has only increased since the Jan. 6 attack.

All of that has meant a divisive and polarizing presidential election that could go either way — and a post-election period that has many concerned about the way forward, especially when the integrity of U.S. elections has been what has set the country apart from other countries around the world.
is a senior correspondent who explains what society obsesses over, from Marvel and movies to fitness and skin care. He came to Vox in 2014. Prior to that, he worked at the Atlantic.

It’s the Monday before the 2024 presidential election and Republicans cannot stop talking about the state-sanctioned euthanizing of a squirrel named Peanut.

Known colloquially to his 720,000-plus Instagram followers as P’Nut, the tiny, charismatic rodent has become a right-wing martyr — as has his surviving, very muscular, frequently shirtless owner, Mark Longo, who also happens to be an OnlyFans model with a significant gay following.

Despite the many freedoms New Yorkers are afforded, it turns out that having a squirrel as a pet isn’t legal in New York. In a New York Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) raid on Longo’s property in Pine City, New York, Peanut reportedly bit an officer involved in the investigation. The squirrel and at least one other animal (a raccoon named Fred) were taken from the property and euthanized. What ensued was a social media frenzy that gained particular purchase in right-wing spaces, with conservatives going to bat for the OnlyFans model and his late pet.

How can a woodland rodent become Republican? Did Peanut have to die? Why are Elon Musk and JD Vance talking about this dead animal? Are squirrels good pets? Why does this often-naked man love this squirrel so much?

The more one discovers about Peanut, the more questions arise. That said, here’s one attempt to parse the story of how a charming rodent somehow became the only thing Republicans were interested in less than 24 hours before Election Day.

Who was Peanut the Squirrel, and why was he killed?

For some time now, social media has paid special attention to conventionally attractive men with their pets. It’s not unrelated to the whole phenomenon of men on dating apps posing with their dogs and cats. It wasn’t complicated: Extremely fit man + adorable pet = many, many internet followers.

In a simpler era, before Peanut and his owner were conservative celebrities, a friend sent me a post from Longo’s social media. It was a video of a shirtless Longo, hanging out with Peanut. The message, though unspoken, was clear: Look at this man with his big muscles and his little squirrel (not a euphemism).

Longo’s other videos — wearing tight pants with squirrel, wearing tiny shorts with squirrel, sporting a bulge with squirrel — made it clear that although the TikTok account was named “Peanut the Squirrel,” his co-star was the real draw. Longo’s OnlyFans account, “Squirrel Daddy,” seemed to confirm that he was parlaying his and Peanut’s social media fame into lucrative filmed sex work — work that, to be extremely clear, did not feature Peanut.

While Longo and Peanut’s fame was ascending, no one was asking about the legality of Longo’s ownership of Peanut. According to Longo in interviews with the New York Post, he found Peanut seven years earlier as an orphaned kit (the term for baby squirrels) and raised the small, charming rodent himself.

Unfortunately for Longo, the animal laws of New York state, where he and Peanut lived together, do not allow humans to have squirrels as pets, orphaned or not. Longo and his partner also owned Fred the raccoon — another animal that isn’t allowed to be kept as a pet. In addition to Peanut and Fred, Longo and his partner opened P’Nuts Freedom Farm, an animal sanctuary in Pine City, in April 2023.

After fielding numerous anonymous complaints about Longo’s animals (Longo has stated he believes the complaints were from internet activists), the DEC said it raided Longo’s home last week. According to official reports, during the inspection, Peanut bit one of the investigating officers; the DEC, following protocol, put Peanut and Fred (the raccoon) down and tested them for rabies.

The DEC said in a statement:

On Oct. 30, DEC seized a raccoon and squirrel sharing a residence with humans, creating the potential for human exposure to rabies. In addition, a person involved with the investigation was bitten by the squirrel. To test for rabies, both animals were euthanized.

My colleague Keren Landman, an MD who has trained as a physician and epidemiologist, pointed out that the measures might have been overaggressive. Longo had been raising Peanut in his home for over seven years. If the squirrel were actually rabid, he would have had a short life span. The animal was also captive, she pointed out, and could have had his blood tested without being killed.

In the wake of Peanut and Fred’s euthanasia, Longo has been speaking at length with the Post in exclusive interviews.

“They treated me like I was a terrorist. They treated this raid as if I was a drug dealer,” Long told the Post, explaining that the raid was around five hours.

Longo also addressed the people who filed complaints against him, Peanut, Fred, and his animal sanctuary. “To the group of people who called DEC, there’s a special place in hell for you,” Longo added.

How did Peanut become a right-wing martyr?

Based on Peanut’s social media presence (created by Longo), there was no obvious partisan messaging on Peanut’s accounts. The closest Peanut got to politics was celebrating the holidays with no specific mention of Christmas. The same goes for Longo’s social media presence, where his adult content is described as “kinky” and has a gay following.

Yet, because of Longo’s interviews with the Post, which leans conservative, right-wing personalities have picked up his and Peanut’s story. Many frame Longo and Peanut as an example of government overreach. With the aid of AI, some conservatives like Musk turned Peanut into a right-wing meme, creating images like a phalanx of Peanuts ready for war, or Peanut as a Jedi chipmunk (even though Peanut was a squirrel).

Peanut’s tale of potentially wrongful euthanasia has gotten so popular with the Republicans that Vance cited the tiny mammal in his campaign speeches.

“Have you seen the videos of this squirrel? He’s, like, a genius. Or he was,” Vance told a crowd in North Carolina, assuring them that his running mate was as heated about the squirrel death as he was.

“Is it really the case that the Democrats murdered the Elon Musk of squirrels?” Vance said, recalling a conversation he had with Donald Trump.

The claim being made here is that the DEC, which was responsible for Peanut’s death, is synonymous with the Democratic Party. How, precisely, is unclear. It is also unclear what the “Elon Musk of squirrels” even means. As Vance’s critics point out, he and his cohort have shown more empathy toward a tiny rodent deemed a potential rabies risk than immigrant families or human victims of police brutality.

At this juncture, Peanut has been transformed by the very-online right into a mascot to rile up engagement. Musk and right-wing influencer Ian Miles Cheong have both — perhaps facetiously — connected Peanut’s death to an eventual Republican victory, although the math on that remains fairly “??? Profit.” New York, where Peanut resided illegally, is a solidly blue state. It is true, however, that putting down an animal is an emotional topic for many across party lines, a subject that Musk likely remembers from the Harambe discourse of 2016. (At the time, Trump said the zoo officials who shot the gorilla “didn’t have a choice.”)

Longo, for his part, has raised over $180,000 in the wake of Peanut’s death, funds that he says will go toward his animal sanctuary’s “mission.” Many of those donations cite the politics that Peanut has become connected to. It just goes to show that being at the center of a culture war — even one that is, for the big-name players, perhaps a little hollow — pays.
Support independent journalism that matters — become a Vox Member today.

In media and politics, timing is everything — which leaves many people wondering why journalist and author Michael Wolff waited until mere days before the presidential election to drop a bombshell: what he says are recordings of Jeffrey Epstein discussing his intimate friendship with Republican candidate Donald Trump.

Wolff, author of Fire and Fury, a bestselling 2018 book about the Trump White House, dropped a brief clip from the tapes last week on his Fire and Fury podcast, on which he and co-host James Truman gab about the news and political insider gossip. In the clip, Epstein chit-chats about how Trump played mind games with his staff. After it made headlines over the weekend, Wolff shared a wider selection of the “hundred hours” of his Epstein recordings with the Daily Beast, which published excerpts Monday.

On the tapes — which, it must be noted, feature only Epstein’s version of events — Epstein proclaims he was Trump’s “closest friend.” He depicts the pair as bros who partied together for over a decade, and Trump as a dedicated womanizer and adulterer.

“The only thing I really like to do is fuck the wives of my best friends,” Trump allegedly told Epstein after a tryst. “That is just the best.’”

The Trump campaign has responded to the tapes by accusing Wolff of outright lying and “blatant election interference on behalf of [Trump’s opponent] Kamala Harris.”

What’s striking about the allegations Epstein makes in the tapes is that they aren’t anything we haven’t heard before, about Trump’s friendship with Epstein or Trump himself.

The pair’s “bromance” has been a matter of public record since the ’90s, with plenty of accompanying salacious gossip. No fewer than 28 women have come forward to publicly accuse Trump of sexual misconduct against them over the decades. The two most recent allegations were made within days of each other, with the 27th accuser, Stacey Williams, claiming that Epstein had introduced Trump to her and that the two men seemed to be treating her like the object of a “twisted” game.

Wolff said on the podcast that he was motivated to release the Epstein-Trump clip after the 28th accuser, former Swiss pageant queen Beatrice Keul, also made a recent allegation of sexual assault against the former president.

Wolff claimed to the Daily Beast that he’d attempted unsuccessfully to interest various media outlets in the tapes at various points in the past. Those editors likely passed on the clips due to the difficulty of fact-checking them or verifying any of the claims made by Epstein, who died in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges.

Vox likewise makes no claims to the veracity of Epstein’s statements, but even if the claims Epstein makes about Trump can’t be verified, the recordings serve as a visceral reminder that the Epstein-Trump connection was real and well-documented.

It may even serve as a much-needed reminder about the many, many accusations of sexual misconduct that Trump himself has yet to really confront.

Who was Jeffrey Epstein?

Jeffrey Epstein was, ostensibly, a money manager, though whose money he managed was always somewhat unclear. You can learn more about him here or here, but at a basic level, it’s important to know that by the 1990s, he was wealthy enough to buy a private island in the US Virgin Islands and that he moved in circles with some of the richest and most powerful men in the world.

During that time, dozens of women say that he sexually abused them, often while they were underage, then offered them money to find him more girls or young women to abuse. “He told me he wanted them as young as I could find them,” one woman told Miami Herald reporter Julie Brown, saying she recruited 70 or 80 girls for Epstein. A detective in Palm Beach, where much of the alleged abuse took place, called it a “sexual pyramid scheme.”

But Epstein avoided any legal consequences until 2008, when he pleaded guilty to charges of solicitation of prostitution and procurement of minors for prostitution, and served a shockingly light sentence: just 13 months in a private wing of a Palm Beach county jail.

In July 2019, however, thanks in part to Brown’s reporting at the Herald, Epstein was arrested and charged with sex trafficking, accused of recruiting young girls for abuse in both Palm Beach and New York. A month later, before he could be tried, he was found dead in jail; the New York City medical examiner ruled his death a suicide.

Epstein has since become a kind of symbol for the most depraved sort of sexual abuser, a man who, according to the women who came forward, knowingly and repeatedly targeted children, manipulating them and forcing them to become his accomplices in harming others. Other men accused of serial sexual misconduct, like Sean Combs, are often compared to Epstein. Investigations and reports have continued since the money manager’s death — in a 2020 lawsuit, for example, the attorney general of the Virgin Islands said Epstein had run a sex trafficking operation from his private island there, bringing girls as young as 11 to be abused.

Trump and Epstein were more than acquaintances — they were self-professed close friends who partied together for over a decade

On episode 22 of the Fire and Fury podcast, released October 31, Wolff discusses Epstein and Trump’s “longstanding deep relationship.”

“Epstein knew him, really, I think, better than most,” Wolff said. “I mean, this was a true BFF situation: two playboys very much styling themselves as playboys in that Hefner sense, who palled around for the better part of 15 years.”

Trump’s own previous statements bear out this assessment. “I’ve known Jeff for 15 years. Terrific guy,” Trump told New York magazine in 2002, in a profile that now reads like an indictment of the many powerful people in Epstein’s orbit. Archival photos abound of the pair hanging out at events, partying at Mar-a-Lago, double-dating with Melania Trump and Epstein’s girlfriend-turned-business partner Ghislaine Maxwell. In one video recorded at Mar-a-Lago in 1992 and released in 2019, Trump appears to point out women to Epstein and then to whisper something in his ear, making him laugh. The earliest photos hail from the early ’90s; Trump was a frequent dinner guest of Epstein’s until at least 2003.

Trump told New York magazine that “Jeffrey enjoys his social life” and “he’s a lot of fun to be with.” He also told the magazine, “It is even said that he likes beautiful women as much as I do, and many of them are on the younger side.” A source once told Page Six that Epstein had formerly “use[d] the spa” at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago club “to try to procure girls.” (The club claimed it had since banned Epstein, a claim Epstein disputed to Page Six.) Photos of Trump and Maxwell — now serving her conviction on sex trafficking charges for having procured underage victims for Epstein — also abound.

In addition to Epstein frequently attending Trump parties at Mar-a-Lago, Trump allegedly also frequently partied at Epstein’s former New York townhouse. This included allegedly having sex with at least one of Epstein’s victims “on regular occasions,” according to an Epstein survivor who later testified in court to witnessing the meetings. Another Epstein accuser testified in court that Epstein introduced her to Trump when she was just 14. (Trump has denied the accusations.)

Epstein and Trump eventually had a falling out in 2004 after they reportedly feuded over the since-destroyed Maison de l’Amitie estate in Palm Beach. In 2008, Epstein pleaded guilty to drastically reduced charges of procuring a child for prostitution and soliciting a prostitute — crimes for which he served 13 months of an 18-month sentence. Trump has since distanced himself publicly from Epstein, claiming he was “not a fan” of the money manager and had “no idea” of Epstein’s crimes.

The Wolff tapes, if true, add some new dimension to the dissolution of their friendship and Epstein’s downfall. According to Wolff, Epstein first told Trump that he was planning to buy the Palm Beach estate, only for Trump, as court records recently revealed, to outbid him. Following this dispute, according to Wolff, Epstein came to suspect that Trump was the person who initiated the subsequent criminal investigation into Epstein’s now-infamous parties.

For Epstein’s part, based on his comments to Wolff, it seemed he remained interested in Trump’s trajectory and had trouble even grasping that Trump, who he described as “functionally illiterate,” could have made it into the White House.

In the tapes, Epstein emphatically showed his distaste for his former friend, calling him “a horrible human being.”

Why all this matters

It’s an open question whether Wolff’s revelations about Epstein and Trump will play any role in the 2024 election. The tapes have had little time to percolate through the media landscape or to be investigated and fact-checked. There’s also a widespread belief that no accusation against Trump, no matter how damning, can truly damage his standing with his supporters: He was caught on tape bragging about his ability to grab women “by the pussy,” for example, and still won in 2016.

Nonetheless, the Wolff tape underscores what many Americans already knew: that Trump and Epstein spent time together socially, chatting at parties and praising one another in the press, for many years. What’s new on these tapes is largely Epstein’s perspective on their friendship. According to Epstein in his conversations with Wolff, that party life included sexual exploits — a suggestion that Trump himself teased in the New York magazine piece. Williams’ recent allegation against Trump further bolsters the theme of Trump and Epstein competing over women; in her recounting of the incident, Trump groped her aggressively while he and Epstein allegedly smiled at each other, after which Epstein grew angry with Williams.

“Of course, we see now Epstein as the sexual monster,” Wolff said on the podcast episode, “but certainly, at least in Epstein’s telling, he and Trump were pretty much, in this regard, brothers in arms.”

American voters may never know how deep Trump’s association with Epstein went. But we are familiar with the fact that for Trump, abuse of women is a punchline, “locker room talk,” a little joke to share among friends. Trump has never made a secret of what he thinks about women and their bodies.

Ultimately, the Wolff tape may be less of a revelation than a reminder of what’s always been out in the open, if voters choose to see it.
Voters could make recreational weed legal in a majority of U.S. states

toggle caption Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP via Getty Images

Voters in three states will decide on Election Day whether to legalize the recreational use of cannabis — and if more than one of the measures pass, it would mean a majority of U.S. states have recreational marijuana laws on the books.

The measures are up for a vote more than a decade after a Pew poll found that for the first time, a majority of Americans supported legalizing marijuana use. Earlier this year, the Pew Research Center reported that 88% of U.S. adults said marijuana should be legal for medical or recreational use.

The three states are:

Sponsor Message

Florida

Amendment 3 would allow anyone age 21 and over to possess or buy marijuana for their own recreational use.

“Florida’s state economists project legal recreational marijuana sales could generate up to $430 million a year in local and state tax revenues, if voters approve Amendment 3 on November’s ballot,” member station WLRN reports.

“Based on recent polling, a bipartisan majority of Florida voters support Amendment 3, but it's unclear if it will reach the 60% threshold needed for approval,” the station adds.

North Dakota

Initiated Statutory Measure No. 5 “would allow for the production, processing, and sale of cannabis and the possession and use of various forms of cannabis by individuals who are 21 years of age and older.” The state law would overrule any local ordinances.

“The estimated fiscal impact of this measure includes revenues of $10,227,600, expenses of $8,324,275, and an undetermined amount of additional costs associated with behavioral health and social impacts for the 2025-2027 biennium,” according to language on the 2024 ballot.

Medical marijuana is legal in North Dakota, but voters have twice rejected recreational cannabis (in 2018 and 2022).



South Dakota

Initiated Measure 29 would allow people over 21 to use cannabis recreationally, in a state that voted to legalize medical marijuana in 2020. Like their neighbors to the north, this is the third time South Dakotans are being asked to decide on legal cannabis. Voters approved legalizing weed in 2020 — but the change was thrown out in court, after the measure was found to violate the state’s single-subject requirement.

Sponsor Message

This time around, the measure doesn’t include language about the sale and regulation of marijuana and other issues that were in the earlier amendment.

“Counties could see incarceration expenses reduced by $581,556 every year,” according to a guidance note from the attorney general’s office.

Recent opinion polls suggest voters might balk at legalization, Jonathan Ellis of the independent news outlet The Dakota Scout, told South Dakota Public Broadcasting.

“They have 51% no versus 44% yes,” Ellis said in late October. “Those numbers have switched from an earlier poll that was done in August, September. An internal poll that I was privy to had it passing. But that is before a really hard negative campaign came out against that. So I would submit that the campaign against legalized marijuana is working for the opponents.”



Experts urge governments to align laws — and regulations

Cannabis is also on the ballot in Nebraska, where Initiative Measure 437 would remove penalties for “the use, possession, and acquisition” of up to 5 ounces of cannabis for medical purposes. It requires a written recommendation from a health care practitioner.

Widening acceptance and advocacy for marijuana as a medical or recreational drug means that a large number of Americans — and their state governments —are at odds with the federal government’s longstanding declaration that cannabis is illegal.

With more people in the U.S. reporting regular marijuana use in recent years, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine said in September that federal and state governments need to fill in the gaps in policies, regulation and standardization, warning that the lack of clear and reliable information poses a risk to the public.

Earlier this year, the Biden administration proposed reclassifying marijuana, a shift that would redefine it from being a Schedule I controlled substance and instead as a Schedule III controlled substance, a category that acknowledges medical benefits. Along with its implications for potential markets and consumers, the federal move would boost research into cannabis.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WASHINGTON (AP) — The Biden administration is stepping up criticism of Israel for not doing enough to improve humanitarian conditions in Gaza as a 30-day deadline looms for Israeli officials to meet certain requirements or risk potential restrictions on military assistance.

State Department spokesman Matthew Miller on Monday gave Israel a “fail” grade in terms of meeting the conditions for an improvement in aid deliveries to Gaza laid out in a letter last month to senior Israeli officials from Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin.

Advertisement

He said there were still roughly nine days until the deadline expires, but that limited progress so far has been insufficient.

“As of today, the situation has not significantly turned around,” Miller told reporters. “We have seen an increase in some measurements. But if you look at the stipulated recommendations in the letter — those have not been met.”

A man clutches a large sack of flour labeled UNRWA during distribution efforts in Deir al-Balah, Gaza, on Nov. 2, 2024. The Turkish Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency (AFAD) has provided flour amid a food crisis caused by ongoing Israeli attacks. SAEED JARAS via Getty Images

Advertisement

Among other conditions, Austin and Blinken’s letter from mid-October said that Israel must allow in a minimum of 350 trucks a day carrying desperately needed food and other supplies for Palestinians besieged by more than a year of war between Israel and Hamas. By the end of October, an average of just 71 trucks a day were entering Gaza, according to the latest U.N. figures.

“The results are not good enough today,” Miller said. “They certainly do not have a pass. … They have failed to implement all the things that that we recommended. Now, that said, we are not at the end of the 30-day period.”

He would not say when asked what the U.S. would do when the deadline comes up next week, just that “we will follow the law.”

Blinken spoke Monday with Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant, urging additional steps to “substantially increase and sustain humanitarian aid” to civilians in Gaza, according to a State Department readout of their call.

Similarly, Austin has been reinforcing “how important it is to ensure that humanitarian assistance can flow and flow faster into Gaza” in calls with Gallant, said Maj. Gen. Pat Ryder, Pentagon press secretary.

Advertisement

The Israeli military body in charge of humanitarian aid to Gaza, known as COGAT, said it had evacuated 72 patients from hospitals in northern Gaza to other medical facilities Monday and had brought medical supplies as well as fuel, food, water and units of blood.

The head of UNICEF, the U.N. agency for children, said over the weekend that “the entire Palestinian population in North Gaza, especially children, is at imminent risk of dying from disease, famine, and the ongoing bombardments.”

Miller also said the U.S. is looking into a decision by the Israeli government to end an agreement facilitating the work of the U.N. agency for Palestinian refugees, known as UNRWA, which is the main aid provider in Gaza.

It followed the passage of Israeli laws last week to sever ties with UNRWA, a move that Blinken and Austin opposed in their letter.

The Israeli Foreign Ministry said in a statement Monday that it has notified the U.N. of the cancellation of an agreement dating back to 1967 that facilitates UNRWA’s work. It said UNRWA “is part of the problem in the Gaza Strip and not part of the solution.”

Advertisement

Israel alleges that UNRWA has been infiltrated by Hamas, which the agency denies and says it takes measures to ensure its neutrality.

U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres reiterated that UNRWA is essential and there is no alternative to its work in the Palestinian territories, spokesman Stephane Dujarric said.

At the same time, Miller said the U.S. is “deeply concerned” by a recent escalation in attacks by Israeli settlers on Palestinians in the West Bank, including several cars being torched overnight just a few kilometers (miles) away from the Palestinian Authority’s headquarters and attacks on Palestinians harvesting olives, their livestock and other property.

“These violent actions cause intense human suffering for Palestinians and they threaten Israel’s security,” Miller said. “It is critical that the government of Israel deter extremist settler violence and take measures to protect all communities from harm in accordance with its international obligations.”

He noted that the U.S. has since the beginning of the year imposed sanctions against Israeli groups and people implicated in violence against Palestinian civilians and warned of more to come.

Advertisement

___
It was not so long ago that millennials were the youngest generation getting elected to public office and infiltrating the halls of power. Now, Gen Z is fast on their heels. Across the country this year, young twentysomethings have campaigned for state and federal office, in some cases against candidates more than twice their age.

But in an election cycle flooded with historical amounts of money, it hasn’t been an easy time to break in.

Cheyenne Hunt, a 26-year-old law school graduate, ran for Congress in California’s 45th District but lost in the Democratic primary. She said that undoubtably the biggest challenge she faced in her race was fundraising. “For so many young people, we just looked at the status quo and realized we couldn’t afford to wait our turn,” Hunt told me over the phone recently. “Too much was at stake, too many issues that were existential.” She ran on a platform of reproductive rights, addressing climate change, and creating more economic opportunities for young people.

Hunt, like so many of the other Gen Z candidates this year, is best described as extremely driven: Before running for office, she worked at the United Nations in the office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression and was a law clerk in Sen. Amy Klobuchar’s office, where she said she got to work on Trump’s first impeachment trial. Her primary race was against six other Democratic candidates in a district that encompasses parts of Los Angeles and Orange County, challenging the 69-year-old Republican incumbent Michelle Steel.

Advertisement

Hunt said she struggled from the onset, with people questioning her qualifications at every turn and suggesting she was too young to understand her constituents’ needs. But “the thing that deeply disturbed me about this system, there’s a reason why almost everyone in Congress looks the same, comes from the same background, is from the same socioeconomic status,” Hunt said. “It’s because those people are in a situation to fundraise easily and from a personal network.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Averie Bishop, a 28-year-old law school graduate running as a Democrat for the Texas House in a district that encompasses part of Dallas, echoed that sentiment. At first, Bishop said, she thought her age would be the biggest hindrance to her candidacy, but she found that people were open to hearing her out and could sense her passion. What’s been a profoundly bigger challenge has been the cost of running a political campaign. “I have been running for office for the past year, and learning what I know now, I am so disenchanted by the bureaucracy of politics,” Bishop said. In Texas, there are no campaign contribution limits for state House races. So despite her rising profile—Bishop was winner of the 2022 Miss Texas pageant and has a gigantic following on TikTok—she is still working full time as a technology consultant. Her campaign salary couldn’t cover the costs of running for office.

Advertisement

Bishop remains undeterred. “It was mostly my dad that influenced me to run for office,” she told me over a Zoom call. “When I was 17 or 18 years old, he decided to run for mayor of McKinney, Texas, despite not having any money, maybe $200 in his checking account, and no college education.” Her dad was a school bus driver and ran on securing better benefits for public school teachers, bus drivers, and students. He lost the race, but his courage inspired Bishop to run on a unapologetically progressive platform—restoring reproductive rights, reforming student debt, and securing better funding for public schools—and to take on the incumbent, Angie Button, a 70-year-old Republican who has held her district since 2009.

Advertisement

Young candidates like Bishop don’t have vast campaign networks to tap into; they are also not the types of candidates who attract deep-pocketed super PACs. This has always been the case, but the barrier to entry has gotten substantially higher with each election cycle since 2010, when the Supreme Court opened the floodgates for unlimited political spending in Citizens United. In 2024, candidates running in federal House and Senate races (as well as their various backers) have collectively spent $10 billion, according to OpenSecrets; by the end of all this, 2024 will probably top 2020, which cost $14 billion, as the most expensive election cycle in U.S. history.

Advertisement

“The reality is, when you’re young, in your 20s and running for office, you can’t depend on your friends to give you money, because they’re just out of college,” Ashwin Ramaswami, a 25-year-old candidate from Georgia, told me.

Advertisement

A graduate of Stanford University and Georgetown Law, Ramaswami used to work in cybersecurity for the federal government and is now running in one of the only competitive state Senate races in Georgia, in a district that Trump carried by 3 percentage points and Democratic Sen. Raphael Warnock narrowly won in 2020. When he started his campaign, Ramaswami said he was told he would need to raise up to $1 million to be competitive. He told me in October that he had raised over $700,000, but it took blood, sweat, and tears to get there.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“You have to build connections and connect with people who are already at the apex of their careers,” he said, calling the race to get boatloads of cash “an exercise in bridge-building.” Despite bringing in an impressive amount for a first-time candidate in a statewide race, Ramaswami said that the super PACs supporting his opponent are dumping $250,000 a month into the race. That’s a level of spend he just can’t compete with.

Advertisement

Ramaswami’s opponent is Republican state Sen. Shawn Still, who was indicted with Donald Trump in the Georgia election interference case. Ramaswami has handed out flyers with Still’s mug shot, calling the state senator “wrong for Georgia.” Still has attacked his 25-year-old opponent for his age, dinging him for living with his parents. “There’s a huge contrast here between someone like me, who represents the future and can really bring our community forward, versus criminals and corrupt people,” Ramaswami said.

Advertisement

Currently, there’s only one Gen Z candidate in Congress, the Florida Democrat Maxwell Frost. Nearly all of the Gen Z candidates who were running for federal office this year either lost their primary or dropped out, but many who are running for state office have managed to stay in their races. (Future Caucus, a nonprofit that works to get young people to run for office, found that younger candidates were disproportionately eliminated from their races in 2024.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

The inability of Gen Z candidates to break in is reflective of a new trend where people are generally not retiring as early as they once did, said Patrick Fisher, a political science professor at Seton Hall University. “It’s kind of like the baby boomers are hogging political positions,” he said.

“I don’t think it’s a lack of experience that is the barrier for young candidates. I really believe it’s more in the line of fundraising and name recognition,” Rachel Janfaza, an expert on youth voter culture and founder of the newsletter the Up and Up, told me. But having fewer young people on the ballot makes it harder to activate and engage young voters, she said. In listening sessions across the country, Janfaza has repeatedly heard young people say they don’t feel like they identify with a specific political party, and that’s driven by the fact that “they don’t see people in politics who look like and sound like and talk like them.”

Advertisement

That will eventually change—even if the cost of campaigns and the amount of outside spending continues to tick upward. (All three Gen Zers Slate interviewed said they wanted to prioritize campaign finance reform to rein in dark money spending.) Generational change is, after all, inevitable.

When these young candidates do eventually start breaking through, they will face a whole other set of financial challenges because of what it costs to actually be a legislator. Bishop said that even if she wins, she may not be able to afford rent in Austin, “let alone afford the rent I have to have here in the district to maintain my eligibility to be a state representative,” she said. “These are all infrastructure challenges and barriers that keep young people out of office.”
So far, this election has been unpredictable. After all, who could have foreseen two assassination attempts, a sitting president dropping out after he'd all but secured the nomination and, well, pretty much everything else?

But Election Day is here, and it will be hours until we learn who won, and perhaps days before we find out why.

Until then, we've asked 17 election experts and analysts to weigh in on the predictions that they are willing to put their names behind before the results are in. Here's what they said.

Rotimi Adeoye, Pennsylvania journalist

My prediction: Vice President Kamala Harris will win Pennsylvania. For years, Democrats have lost touch with rural Pennsylvania, prioritizing globalization over local economic realities. In places like Wilkes-Barre and Johnstown, communities devastated by disappearing factories and coal mines felt abandoned. Harris is breaking that pattern. Her campaign isn’t just showing up in these forgotten regions; they are simultaneously energizing classic Democratic strongholds like Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and the suburban blue-collar counties. By building a comprehensive strategy that speaks to rural economic revitalization and urban political mobilization, she’s crafting a nuanced approach that could fundamentally reshape Pennsylvania’s political landscape.

Billy Ball, North Carolina journalist

It’s a small sample size, but since Roe v. Wade fell to a Republican-dominated Supreme Court in June 2022, the polls and the pundits have consistently underestimated women voting to protect reproductive rights.

In other words, women are going to fight harder to protect the rights that some men (and conservative women) are trying to take from them. Women will turn out in extraordinary numbers. Their votes, combined with Donald Trump’s alienation of moderate conservative voices, will help Harris become the first woman president of the United States.

Brian Tyler Cohen, "No Lie" podcast host

Trump will declare victory early — perhaps even on Tuesday night, well before all of the votes have been counted, surfacing baseless claims of fraud to justify his position. His hope is that by announcing it as some grandiose proclamation from behind a podium, it’ll carry weight. His hope is that right-wing media will uncritically spread his claims in an effort to further cement his lie as truth. His hope is that Republican lawmakers and Senators will use the fact that their voters believe Trump won (merely because he said it) as a predicate not to certify the election results. They will all amplify each other, creating a feedback loop. Do not fall for it. Ballots will be counted until the states certify. The certification process will be transparent and accurate. Trump will lie, but the numbers won’t.

Ruth Ben-Ghiat, historian

My prediction: Harris will win. Her campaign has affirmed the core principles of democracy: unity, solidarity, the power of positive emotions and optimism (joy and hope), empowering people to express themselves through their votes, and showing the promise of America as a multiracial and multifaith democracy. Her campaign, which made space for Republicans who no longer identify with a party that has become anti-democratic, has laid the basis for a pro-democracy movement to flourish in America regardless of the results of this election.

Trump bet on making racism and extremism and the cultivation of violence the core of his campaign. As a skilled propagandist whose lies are backed up by Fox and the GOP, he still has plenty of followers, but demeaning so many groups with dehumanizing language has alienated many from his campaign. Repeating over and over that America is failing, that the American dream is dead, and insulting your compatriots is not a platform. American voters will respond accordingly.

Steve Benen, editor of MaddowBlog

My prediction: Trump's appeal won't be transferrable. In the 2022 midterm elections, a variety of Republican candidates thought that if they emulated Trump and stuck to his bombastic and conspiratorial playbook, the former president’s base would embrace them and propel them to victory. As Pennsylvania’s Doug Mastriano, New Hampshire’s Don Bolduc and Arizona’s Blake Masters came to realize, Trump’s qualities — I’m using the word loosely — are unique and nontransferable. In the 2024 cycle, I predict that others will learn the same lesson. There’s no shortage of candidates who embody all that is MAGA — North Carolina’s Mark Robinson and Arizona’s Kari Lake, I’m looking in your direction — who are seeking statewide offices in states where the former president might yet prevail. But they’re going to lose anyway, because for much of the electorate, there might be some appetite for Trump, but there’s far less for his imitators.

Brendan Buck, Republican strategist

Trump is going to comfortably sweep the Sun Belt states, by 2 percent or more in each, putting intense pressure on Harris’ Midwest firewall. In Arizona and Nevada, Trump’s inroads with Hispanic voters and painfully high housing costs there will put those two states out of reach. Georgia, my home state, has not been kind to Trump in the past, but it remains a red state at its core. The anti-Trump fire in the suburbs has subsided mildly, and Republican voters there who don’t care for Trump are itching to be back with the red team. This leaves all eyes up north.

Katelyn Burns, freelance journalist based in New England

Polls are close but poll responses aren’t votes. In an election this close, polls are less reliable because of the statistical calculations pollsters have to make to parse the data. I think turnout among women will be higher than pollsters are anticipating driven by anger over abortion access, and Harris will be the next president of the United States. I also don’t think Democrats will end up doing anything to move the needle on abortion or other culture issues if elected because they are afraid of right-wing backlash.

Eric Garcia, senior Washington correspondent and bureau chief for The Independent

We may finally be seeing polarization by education changing how we think of the map in the West and the Southeast. Democrats have dominated in the West, particularly in Nevada, for two decades on the presidential level. Conversely, Democrats have not won North Carolina since Barack Obama’s 2008 victory.

But plenty of factors have changed. For one, Democrats have largely lost non-college-educated voters, including non-college-educated voters of color. Trump expedited this process focusing on the economy. As of 2023, only 28.7% of Nevadans have a degree. On top of that, Harris and Trump are tied for Hispanic male voters. Republicans have also engaged in an aggressive early voting outreach operation.

The opposite dynamic has happened in North Carolina. In recent years, an influx of highly educated Yankees have moved into the state. Combine that with Harris likely being able to maximize Black voter turnout, she has a legitimate chance at turning North Carolina the lightest of Carolina blue.

My prediction: Trump wins Nevada, and Harris wins North Carolina.

Nayyera Haq, former White House senior director

Despite the nauseous optimism around this election, we won’t breathe a collective sigh of relief until the oath of office is taken on Jan. 20. Our anxiety levels aren’t high just because a new president is about to be elected; it’s the blatant public racism, Nazi-style gatherings and effort to stack the courts against public sentiment that has people worried about our future. And given we’ve already experienced one insurrection on Jan. 6, 2021, it’s hard to imagine any relief from this constant vigilance of “what will happen next?” until a new president is sworn-in and safely ensconced in the White House. May there be enough Lexapro and Xanax to last us until then.

Kali Holloway, political journalist

I predict that far fewer Black and Latino men will cast ballots for Trump than the media and Republican propagandists have projected. Most of those men — and by most, I mean 85 percent or more — will vote for Harris. But you know who will give the plurality, if not more, of their votes to Trump? White women. I’d love to be proven wrong on that last count, but it’s the one prediction I feel most confident about. History has been nothing if not depressingly and repeatedly instructive on that issue.

Molly Jong-Fast, "Fast Politics" podcast host

If Harris wins American women will have saved American democracy and likely the country itself. Harris has campaigned magnificently, but even more important than that, she has reached across the aisle to create a broad coalition of women (and men but women more than anything). None of us know what’s going to happen, but we know that early voting has a huge gender divide.

Olivia Messer, The Barbed Wire editor-in-chief

The balance of power in the U.S. Senate is on the line. Thirty-four seats are up for election in 2024, and battleground states include Michigan, Arizona, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Nevada and Wisconsin. But it’s increasingly looking like there’s a tied race in Texas between Sen. Ted Cruz and Rep. Colin Allred. My prediction? The party that wins the Texas race for U.S. Senate will win majority control of the chamber in 2025. If Cruz wins, the Senate will flip red. But if Allred wins Texas, Democrats will maintain control of the upper chamber.

Dean Obeidallah, SiriusXM radio host

My prediction: Trump’s “bro vote” strategy will be a loser. Trump is banking his election prospects on young men coming out to vote in big numbers — as we’ve seen with his appearances on “bro” type podcasts shows like Joe Rogan — and that tells us that Trump doesn’t understand the power of women voters. In 2020, young women (aged 18-29) voted at a rate of 11% higher than young men — and that is across all races. When you add that this is the first presidential election since Roe was overturned, we will very likely see that gap grow.

Kavita Patel, health policy researcher

Women will turn out in unprecedented numbers this election cycle, driven by the urgent need to safeguard reproductive rights. With nearly 79% of women of reproductive age believing this election will significantly affect abortion access, the stakes have never been higher. This surge in engagement reflects a collective determination to reclaim autonomy over their bodies and assert their influence in shaping policies that affect their lives and futures.

The youth vote is set to explode onto the political scene like never before, potentially igniting a seismic shift in this election’s outcome. We’re likely to witness an unprecedented surge of young voters, fired up and ready to flex their political muscle on issues that hit close to home. This wave of Gen Z and millennial engagement could be the game-changer that flips the script in crucial swing states, leaving traditional political playbooks in shambles.

Communities of color will also be a game changer for this election particularly on Election Day itself for several reasons: less trust in early voting or process related to mail-in as well as a psychological desire to participate in a more national, visible way.

Susan Del Percio, Republican strategist

I'm not expecting a blue wave on election night. But I do think that next year we'll be calling New York Rep. Hakeem Jeffries "Mr. Speaker." With just a four-seat majority, Republicans are holding on by a thread. There are 16 congressional seats where Biden won in 2020 and Republicans then won in 2022. The majority of those are in the bluest of states: California and New York.

In these states it will come down to three things. The first is math: Turnout is higher in presidential years, which will benefit Democrats. The second is money, as the best-planned campaign is nothing without the funding and Democrats have been significantly outraising Republicans.

The third thing is Trump, who will weigh down Republican candidates in the must-win areas.

Julio Ricardo Varela, founder of "The Latino Newsletter"

This is my stone-cold mortal lock prediction for 2024: Time to retire the phrase “Latinos are not a monolith.” As a journalist who has been writing about Latino voters since the first Obama campaign, Latinos have never been guaranteed Democratic voters. Ronald Reagan knew. So did George W. Bush. Now, the truth has finally become mainstream, and any future coverage of Latinos in electoral cycles will shift to what I said in 2020: “It’s like we’re swing states.” Welcome all non-Latino political journalists who are now saying the same thing in 2024. Time to think of new phrases.

Paul Waldman, author of "White Rural Rage"

In the days following the election as we wait to learn who won, there will be outbreaks of violence at state and county election offices around the country, as Trump supporters whipped into a frenzy by his venomous lies follow his implicit instructions to take by force what they may not have won at the ballot box.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

ALLENTOWN, Pa. (AP) — Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump made their final pitches to voters Monday in the same parts of Pennsylvania at roughly the same time, focusing on the state that could make or break their chances during the last full day of the presidential campaign.

In Pittsburgh, Trump delivered what his campaign aides described as his closing argument after his previous attempt — a mass rally at Madison Square Garden in New York ― was derailed by crude and racist jokes. He has also veered off message with falsehoods about voter fraud and invocations of violence.

Advertisement

“Over the past four years, Americans have suffered one catastrophic failure, betrayal and humiliation after another,” said the Republican nominee, sounding raspy yet energetic after speaking for hours each day.

“We do not have to settle for weakness, incompetence, decline and decay,” he went on. “With your vote tomorrow, we can fix every single problem our country faces and lead America, and indeed the whole world, to new heights of glory.”

The crowd exploded in cheers when the Republican nominee said the country should tell Harris, “You’re fired,” his catchphrase from “The Apprentice,” the reality television show that made him a nationally recognized star.

Trump started Monday in North Carolina and he’s scheduled to hold his last rally of the election in Grand Rapids, Michigan, where he concluded his 2016 and 2020 campaigns.

Advertisement

Harris, the Democratic nominee, is spending all of Monday in Pennsylvania, and she was en route to Pittsburgh while Trump was speaking there. She’s holding her final rally in Philadelphia later in the evening.

“This is it,” Harris said in Pittsburgh in front of the Carrie Furnaces, a historic steel facility that nodded to the city’s industrial legacy. “Tomorrow is Election Day and the momentum is on our side.”

“We must finish strong,” she added. “Make no mistake, we will win.”

Attendees holding the flag of Puerto Rico cheer as Allentown, Pa. Mayor Matt Tuerk speaks during a campaign rally for Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris in Memorial Hall at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa., Monday, Nov. 4, 2024. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh) via Associated Press

With 19 Electoral College votes, the state is the biggest prize of any battleground. A Trump victory there would puncture the Democrats’ “blue wall” and make it harder for Harris to win the necessary 270 votes.

“If we win Pennsylvania, we win the whole ball of wax,” Trump said during an event in Reading, in the state’s southeast corner.

Advertisement

Both candidates visited the area, which is home to thousands of Latinos, including a sizable Puerto Rican population. Harris and her allies have repeatedly hit Trump for a comedian’s dig at Puerto Rico during the former president’s marquee Madison Square Garden event. The comedian, Tony Hinchcliffe, referred to Puerto Rico as a “floating island of garbage.”

“It was absurd,” said German Vega, a Dominican American who lives in Reading and became a U.S. citizen in 2015. “It bothered so many people — even many Republicans. It wasn’t right, and I feel that Trump should have apologized to Latinos.”

But Emilio Feliciano, 43, waited outside Reading’s Santander Arena for a chance to take a photo of Trump’s motorcade. He dismissed the comments about Puerto Rico despite his family being Puerto Rican, saying he cares about the economy and that’s why he will vote for Trump.

“Is the border going to be safe? Are you going to keep crime down? That’s what I care about,” he said.

Harris told the crowd, “I stand here proud of my long-standing commitment to Puerto Rico and her people.”

Advertisement

“And I will be a president for all Americans,” she said, adding that “momentum is on our side. Can you feel it?”

Trump, meanwhile, stuck to talking about his proposed crackdown on immigration. He called to the stage Patty Morin, the mother of 37-year-old Rachel Morin, who was found dead a day after she went missing during a trip to go hiking. Officials say the suspect in her death, Victor Antonio Martinez Hernandez, entered the U.S. illegally after allegedly killing a woman in his home country of El Salvador.

About 77 million Americans have voted early. A victory by either side would be unprecedented.

Trump winning would make him the first incoming president to have been indicted and convicted of a felony, after his hush-money trial in New York. He will gain the power to end other federal investigations pending against him. Trump would also become only the second president in history to win nonconsecutive White House terms, after Grover Cleveland in the late 19th century.

Harris is vying to become the first woman, first Black woman and first person of South Asian descent to reach the Oval Office — four years after she broke the same barriers in national office by becoming President Joe Biden’s second in command.

Heading into Monday, Harris has mostly stopped mentioning Trump by name, calling him instead “the other guy.” She is promising to solve problems and seek consensus.

Advertisement

US Vice President Kamala Harris during a campaign event at the Carrie Blast Furnaces National Historic Landmark in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, US, on Monday, Nov. 4, 2024. Kamala Harris and Donald Trump are separated by the narrowest of margins in polls, which show Tuesday's election is a coin flip, and by a chasm in their future vision for the world's premier economic and military power. Photographer: Michael Swensen/Bloomberg via Getty Images Bloomberg via Getty Images

Harris campaign chair Jen O’Malley Dillon said on a call with reporters that not saying Trump’s name was deliberate because voters “want to see in their leader an optimistic, hopeful, patriotic vision for the future.”

Harris also offered some insights into her personal formation as a politician that she doesn’t often divulge. In Scranton, she talked about once being a longshot while running for San Francisco district attorney in 2002 and how she “used to campaign with my ironing board.”

“I’d walk to the front of the grocery store, outside, and I would stand up my ironing board because, you see, an ironing board makes a really great standing desk,” the vice president said, recalling how she would tape her posters to the outside of the board, fill the top with flyers and “require people to talk to me as they walked in and out.”

In Allentown, Harris rallied with rapper Fat Joe. She then made her own visit to Reading after Trump’s rally had concluded, visiting Old San Juan Cafe, a Puerto Rican restaurant, with Ocasio-Cortez. Both Fat Joe, whose real name is Joseph Cartagena, and Ocasio-Cortez are of Puerto Rican heritage.

Advertisement

Supporters chanted “Sí se puede” and “Kamala” as the vice president’s motorcade pulled up. Once inside, Harris chatted with some diners, even mixing in “Gracias” and a few Spanish words. The vice president later ordered cassava, yellow rice and pork, saying, “I’m very hungry” as she noted that she’s been too busy campaigning to find time for many meals.

Harris did some of her own canvassing afterward, stopping at two homes in Reading while flanked by campaign volunteers.

“It’s the day before the election and I just wanted to come by and say I hope to earn your vote,” she said at one house.

The woman replied, “You already got my vote” and said her husband would be casting his ballot the next day.

Standing in line for Harris’ Allentown rally, 54-year-old Ron Kessler, an Air Force veteran and Republican-turned-Democrat, said he planned to vote for just the second time in his life. Kessler said that, for a long time, he didn’t vote, thinking the country “would vote for the correct candidate.”

Advertisement

But “now that I’m older and much more wiser, I believe it’s important, it’s my civic duty. And it’s important that I vote for myself and I vote for the democracy and the country.”

___
One of the most important ads of the 2024 presidential election is only six seconds long.

“Donald Trump wants to cut taxes for these guys,” a narrator says as images of Amazon founder Jeff Bezos and Tesla CEO Elon Musk, the second-richest and richest man in the world, respectively, appear on screen. “Kamala Harris wants a tax cut for middle-class families.”

Why is a six-second ad, barely long enough to say the names of both candidates, so important? Because unlike most ads on YouTube — and a lot of other social media platforms — the viewer is not allowed to skip it, which is important in a fragmented media environment where viewers rarely have to watch anything they don’t want to watch. And the low-information, low-propensity, disaffected voters who may end up deciding the 2024 presidential election don’t pay attention to politics and don’t want to pay attention to politics.

Advertisement

“Those sort of annoying ads that people see where they have to watch until you get to hit skip?” said Quentin Fulks, the deputy campaign manager on Harris’ team who oversees paid media. “That’s the good stuff. You make sure you get that.”

Or as Ishanee Parikh, the creative director at FF PAC, the super PAC behind the aforementioned ad, put it: “Any avenue where we can put paid media and get someone to have to watch something, we’re there.”

Parikh and Fulks are among the leading figures in the sprawling effort — costing more than a billion dollars, involving hundreds of operatives and staffers, and resulting in a potentially uncountable number of ads — by the Democratic Party and other allies of Harris to solve one of the biggest problems they faced at the beginning of the election cycle: Disaffected voters, hammered by inflation, felt particularly disaffected toward the Democrats and the party’s 81-year-old incumbent candidate, Joe Biden.

Advertisement

Whether Harris, the party’s nominee for barely more than 100 days, is elevated to the presidency will come down in no small part to how FF PAC and the Harris campaign used their combined war chests — nearly $1.4 billion, according to Federal Election Commission records — to find, reach and persuade the disaffected.

Switching from Biden to Harris helped with the problem. Disaffected voters, while they come in basically every demographic box in the book, do tend to be younger, more diverse and less educated. Harris improved the party’s standing with all of these groups. But selling them on voting, and on voting for Harris, first required finding them.

These voters do not watch the nightly news. “They’re not watching speeches of the candidates,” Parikh said. “They most likely didn’t watch the debate.”

In fact, many of them don’t watch broadcast or cable television at all, except for rare moments like the Olympics and NFL games, events for which both campaigns eagerly bought up television time. The Harris campaign and FF PAC each put more than half of their ad buys toward digital advertising. Democrats have a significant advantage over the GOP in digital advertising, with the Harris campaign outspending the Trump campaign 20 to 1.

That’s because the number of platforms you can spread ads across is massive. YouTube is the biggest player, but Hulu, Facebook, Instagram, Google search and a multitude of lesser-known streaming services all receive significant advertising dollars. The Harris campaign, in order to reach out to young men, advertised the candidate’s immigrant story during La Liga soccer matches and ads about how Trump inspired anti-Asian hate on the gaming website IGN.

Advertisement

Once you can find them, you have to grab their attention. Ashley Aylward, a research manager at HIT Strategies, a Democratic polling firm, recounted running focus groups of young women. The participants were shown a simple video of Harris, speaking at a podium and promising to protect abortion rights. The women agreed they found it persuasive. But they also agreed if they came across it on social media, they would swipe away before watching it in full.

“It’s a tough nut to crack,” Aylward said, recommending the party work with influencers as an alternative to using paid media. She noted young men, in particular, would recoil as soon as a politician spoke: “As soon as they see that it’s a political message, they just turn off their brains and disengage.”

The Harris campaign would occasionally deploy so-called “brain rot” techniques to grab viewers’ attention, for instance by running a clip of Subway Surfers gameplay alongside otherwise-normal advertising content. But most of their attention-grabbing techniques were more mundane: making sure ads used different angles, or making sure the person delivering the message changed what outfit they were wearing, so viewers wouldn’t just assume they were seeing the same ad for the second or third time.

Once they had their attention, it was about getting a message out quickly — like, really quickly. “What does your ad say in the first three seconds?” Fulks asked, referring to how long the campaign has to convince a viewer to watch the full spot. The campaigns tried to keep their message simple — something Democrats gave the Trump campaign credit for with his “no tax on tips” messaging — and tried to make sure it required almost no background knowledge about the two candidates.

But regardless of what platform they were using, the messaging did not change much. Both the campaign and its allied super PACs focused on basic economic messaging — hitting Trump on his tariff proposals and contrasting them with Harris’ support for an expanded child tax credit, for instance — and on savaging Trump over abortion rights. Those messages tended to perform the best in the extensive message testing now endemic to Democratic political campaigns.

Advertisement

“We’re not slicing and dicing the electorate or seeing big differences in the issues people care about,” Parikh said. “Because even people who care deeply about specific issues, their number one issue is still their wallet.”

There were some audience-specific messages: The Harris campaign, for instance, launched geotargeted digital ads aimed at college campuses to tell students Republicans were threatening the Affordable Care Act’s provision to allow children to stay on their parents’ health insurance until age 26.

There are signs the push may have worked: New York Times/Siena College polling has consistently found Trump dominant among the slice of the electorate that did not vote in 2020 — as good a stand-in as any for low-propensity voters. In May, the survey gave Trump a 48% to 33% edge.
In the days leading up to Tuesday, election anxiety and exhaustion across the country has been at an all-time high — and rightfully so, considering the absolute mayhem that has happened just in the past few months. Here’s a recap:

In May, former President Donald Trump was convicted of 34 felony counts in his New York hush money trial, making him the first former president to ever be convicted of a crime.

Then, in late June, President Joe Biden had a disastrous debate against Trump that led to a raft of panicked Democratic lawmakers urging him to leave the race. Biden fiercely resisted that pressure for weeks but he eventually stepped aside and endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris for president. Democrats quickly coalesced around the vice president, and the enthusiasm for Harris was palpable; her shortened campaign consistently set record fundraising numbers.

In between Trump’s New York conviction and Biden’s decision to leave the race, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that some of Trump’s actions as president are immune from criminal prosecution, a decision that has delayed his New York sentencing and that will potentially affect his other criminal cases as well.

In between Trump’s New York conviction and Biden’s decision to leave the race, the Supreme Court ruled that some of Trump’s actions as president are immune from criminal prosecution.

On July 13, Trump was the target of an assassination attempt at his campaign rally in Butler, Pennsylvania, and the images of a defiant Trump, his fist raised in the air as Secret Service agents dragged him off the podium, were plastered all over the news.

That was just the summer. Since then, Americans have been bombarded with dark warnings from Trump about the infiltration of violent migrants (research shows that immigrants commit far fewer crimes than U.S.-born Americans), his blatantly racist and baseless claims about immigrants taking jobs and eating people’s pets, and his threats to punish his political rivals, public officials who oppose him, and journalists.

Trump was also the target of a second alleged assassination attempt in late September, near his golf club in West Palm Beach, Florida.

Harris, on the other hand, has painted Trump as a threat to democracy, and Democrats have campaigned on the further erosion of women’s rights should Trump win.

Election Day may not even be the end of this ordeal, especially if results in the swing states are as razor-thin as the polls have suggested they will be.
On the final Sunday before Election Day, CNN’s Dana Bash sat down with Sen. Tim Scott and presented the South Carolina Republican with a good question about Donald Trump’s pre-election message: “You think it’s OK to spread false rumors about fraud and undermine the integrity of the election, regardless of what happens?” the “State of the Union” host asked.

Scott, in his role as a Trump surrogate, responded, “The liberal media has done a better job of spreading misinformation than any candidate I have seen so far.”

This was, of course, utterly insane. In fact, if the senator were genuinely interested in those “spreading misinformation,” I might refer him to the man he’s trying to put in the White House. The Washington Post reported on the final pre-election campaign rally held by the Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office.

Donald Trump, speaking at his final campaign rally in Grand Rapids, Michigan, is repeatedly claiming, without evidence, that Democrats will cheat during Tuesday’s election. In the weeks leading up to the election, Trump and his allies have set the stage for disputing the results of the election if he loses, despite having no evidence of widespread fraud. He’s doing so again onstage.

Earlier in the day, reporting from an event in Pennsylvania, The New York Times added, “Trump is once again trying to sow doubts about election results, making unfounded accusations that Democrats would rig the election, based on his debunked lies that they did so in 2020. ‘They’ll try, and they are trying,’ Trump told his supporters. ‘You know that.’”

Those who keep an eye on the former president’s rhetoric know that the final day of pre-election campaigning was not an aberration. The GOP candidate has spent every day of late trying to preemptively delegitimize the 2024 election for the most obvious of reasons: Trump realizes that he might lose, so he’s laying the groundwork now so that he can discredit a possible defeat.

We can say this with some certainty because it’s precisely what he’s done before.

Just as notably, he’s getting plenty of help. Republican Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, who’s never met a conspiracy theory he didn’t like, was on Fox News over the weekend falsely accusing Democrats of cheating. The Washington Post recently published an unsettling analysis that found, “Nearly half of Republican candidates for Congress or top state offices have used social media to cast doubt on the integrity of the 2024 election ... highlighting a pervasive effort within the GOP to undermine public trust in the vote ahead of Nov. 5.”

The party is getting backup from predictable sources. The Post also reported, “More than two dozen popular podcasts have aired claims preemptively casting doubt on the integrity of the 2024 election, disseminating unsubstantiated claims on a popular medium that operates largely outside the view of tech industry monitors.”

Meanwhile, reality-based officials have tried to promote facts. When Trump lied about Pennsylvania’s system of elections, local officials pushed back. When he lied about balloting in Georgia, locals pushed back again.

But if recent history is any guide, Republican voters will believe Trump and his allies over the evidence and those telling the public the truth.

We’ve already seen some of the consequences of such tactics, and there’s every reason to be concerned about a sequel. NBC News reported on the latest from the Proud Boys: “As Donald Trump yet again tells his supporters he can lose Tuesday only if there’s massive voter fraud and as he ramps up violent rhetoric about Democrats and other ‘enemies,’ members of the far-right group that put more ‘boots on the ground’ than any other at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, say they’re mobilizing.”

Watch this space.
Who's paying to elect the president?

Enlarge this image toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

The homestretch of the presidential campaign means huge rallies, a final barrage of campaign ads, and massive multi-state get out the vote efforts.

All of that costs money.

And it seems like every successive presidential election ends up being the most expensive election in history. Open Secrets, a group that tracks election spending, estimates the 2024 federal election cycle will cost nearly $16 billion. It was around $15 billion in 2020.



Vice President Kamala Harris' campaign raised a record billion dollars in just three months. And, according to Open Secrets, tech billionaire Elon Musk has poured more than $118 million into his America PAC in support of former President Donald Trump.



As we publish this episode Tuesday afternoon, we don't know who will win this election, but we do know that outside money has played a bigger role than ever before.



For sponsor-free episodes of Consider This, sign up for Consider This+ via Apple Podcasts or at plus.npr.org.



Email us at considerthis@npr.org.

Sponsor Message

This episode was produced by Connor Donevan. It was edited by Courtney Dorning. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

PHILADELPHIA — The vibes on the eve of the 2024 election are offering mixed messages about what to expect Tuesday: The polls are deadlocked, and both sides are projecting confidence. In Pittsburgh, former President Donald Trump predicted he has a “96.2%” chance of winning a second term.

On Monday night, Joe Rogan, one of the country’s most popular podcasters, endorsed Trump on the heels of Trump’s three-hour interview with Rogan last month. Rogan said Tesla CEO Elon Musk, a top Trump surrogate, helped him come to the decision.

Advertisement

Democrats don’t seem to be sweating the outcome. Harris campaign adviser David Plouffe claimed Vice President Kamala Harris has a path to carry all seven battleground states and is “positioned to win” late-breaking undecided voters.

Trump hosted four rallies across battleground states, nearly crossing paths with Harris in southeast Pennsylvania, where Harris rallied supporters in Allentown just after Trump spoke in Reading. That part of the state is home to a large Latino population, including many Puerto Ricans, who were the target of a racist joke from a comedian at Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally in New York City last weekend.

Trump’s appearances provided more fodder for his critics to say his campaign lacks direction and momentum. Trump spoke at a venue that was only about 70% full in Raleigh, North Carolina, with thousands of empty seats and no line to get inside, according to NBC News. These smaller crowds are becoming more common at Trump events, NBC reported.

Trump went off on bizarre and nasty tangents throughout the day, such as wondering aloud whether he should “hit back” at former first lady Michelle Obama. He seemed annoyed at his top campaign adviser, Susie Wiles. The day before in North Carolina, Trump seemed to forget where he was as he name-checked the GOP nominee for U.S. Senate in Pennsylvania, Dave McCormick.

Advertisement

“If you vote for Kamala, you will have four more years of misery, failure and disaster, and our country may never recover,” Trump said in Pittsburgh.

“Hard work is good work. Hard work is joyful work. And make no mistake, we will win!” - Vice President Kamala Harris

In his rally earlier on Monday in Reading, Trump also returned to his familiar tactic of playing up crimes committed by undocumented immigrants, even though the data shows that undocumented immigrants have a lower crime rate than the native-born population. He promised not to let “savages” and “animals” ― his terms for immigrants who commit violent crimes ― come in to “take out” the United States’ “incredible people.”

The Democratic nominee capped off election eve with back-to-back rallies in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia which carried an upbeat tone that could not have been more different than Trump’s gloomy characterization of the status quo.

The Philly rally, teeming with tens of thousands of people and symbolically located in front of Philadelphia Museum of Art’s famous “Rocky” steps, interspersed speeches from top Pennsylvania Democrats with high-profile musical acts from the likes of The Roots, Ricky Martin and Lady Gaga, and contemporaneous video transmissions from pro-Harris rallies in the other battleground states.

Advertisement

Oprah Winfrey introduced Harris following the performance of an original song by Will.i.am, “Yes She Can.”

The rally was draped in patriotic colors and imagery. Lit up behind Harris on the “Rocky” steps themselves was a blue sign with white letters with the words, “A president for all,” as rows of supporters waved placards in red, white and blue behind her. Some placards advertised the Harris campaign; others simply said, “USA.”

Harris began by acknowledging the symbolism of the location ― in the city where the Founding Fathers declared independence from England and at the foot of the steps where a plucky fictional boxer began his journey to an upset victory. Then she made a prediction.

“Hard work is good work. Hard work is joyful work. And make no mistake, we will win!” Harris said.

Harris’ speech, just shy of 20 minutes, focused less on policy details and more on the opportunity to move forward from the divisive rhetoric of Trump, whom she did not mention by name, toward a future that reflects the country’s promise.

Former President Donald Trump warns at rally in Pittsburgh that "our country may never recover" from a Harris presidency. CHARLY TRIBALLEAU/AFP via Getty Images

Advertisement

“We are done with that. We’re done! We’re exhausted with it,” Harris said of Trump’s routine. “America is ready for a fresh start.”

“Tonight we finish as we started ― with optimism, with energy, with joy ― knowing that we the people have the power to shape our future,” she concluded.

The Harris supporters who converged on the iconic 1976 film’s steps arrived bundled up for chilly weather as temperatures dipped into the low 50s.

But numerous camouflage baseball caps naming Harris and running mate Tim Walz, blue Harris pins and smiles were visible among the hoodies, flannels and scarves.

Summer Cirino, an aide to Pennsylvania state Rep. Melissa Schusterman (D) from the Chester County suburbs, expressed cautious optimism about the outcome after weeks of canvassing.

Advertisement

“There’s definitely a silent majority that is going to carry Harris over the finish line that people aren’t talking about,” said Cirino, who was wearing a Harris campaign scarf with an American flag pattern and a matching American flag sweater. “Obviously, it’s a silent majority, but it’s been hard to convince people from the other side ― people are sticking to their guns this election.”

Janiyah Bryan, a cashier from South Philadelphia wearing the Harris-Walz camo hat backwards, said she came to the rally because she wanted to be a “part of history.”

Harris spoke in front of a crowd holding red, white and blue placards, and a sign that said "A president for all." ANGELA WEISS/Getty Images

“Voting for her, it means a lot to me as a Black woman, because representation is very important to me, and being here tonight is very, very important, because a lot of people are showing up for someone who is ready to take on the job,” Bryan said.

Mariama Diallo, a registered nurse and immigrant from Guinea, said she appreciates Harris because she is the daughter of immigrants. “When I see her, I think about my children,” said Diallo, a southwest Philadelphia resident.

Advertisement

Underneath the joyful atmosphere, though, there was an undercurrent of anxiety about the possibility of a Trump victory after Tuesday’s vote.

Marcia Ruberg, a retired school psychologist from Philadelphia’s Northern Liberties neighborhood, was attending with her husband, Gary Goldberg, a retired software developer.

“I’m here to support her,” Goldberg said. Ruberg, who was sporting a Planned Parenthood stocking hat, interjected: “And be with other people who share our ideals ― the alternative is just too horrible to bear!”

Ruberg fears that Trump will use a second term to exact “retribution” on federal employees and journalists, undo Biden’s climate policies, make vaccines “no longer available” and, of course, erode American democracy.

That final scenario, Ruberg said, “may not happen overnight, but it could be built. And the people who are smart and evil, who are behind him already, have it planned out.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
In his third consecutive bid for the presidency, Donald Trump has cast the United States, yet again, as a nation in decline mired by chaos, violence, internal subversion and subjugation.

The U.S. is a “garbage can,” Trump says, that has been “invaded and conquered” by “murderers, rapists, and illegal criminals” and “vermin” with “bad genes” who are “poisoning the blood of our country” thanks to the machinations of his political foes ― “the enemy within.” Some of these enemies ― immigrants and citizens alike ― are “not people.”

Advertisement

This rhetoric underlies a policy program that aims to tear apart the country at the seams.

Immigrants both with and without legal status are to be targeted for detention, deportation and denaturalization in the largest internal law enforcement project the country has ever undertaken. It will be a “bloody story,” Trump promises.

Political opponents and election officials, the “enemy within” he speaks of, will be investigated and put on trial for unspecified crimes while he will pardon those who attacked the Capitol on Jan. 6 on his behalf. The military will be deployed against U.S. citizens who protest any of these actions. He even aims to suspend the 14th Amendment’s grant of birthright citizenship ― the foundational constitutional provision that enshrines in law the truth we hold to be self-evident, that “all men [and women] are created equal.”

For nearly 10 years, Americans have sought to understand Trump, the intellectual currents that sustain his political rise and the MAGA movement that adores him. And they’ve tried to understand why he defies what were once the normal rules of politics. Scandals, whether it be his crude and insulting statements, the many allegations of sexual assault levied against him or his naked corruption, deflect off of him. Fact-checking, which boomed as a journalism endeavor during his presidency, made little difference.

Advertisement

The problem that many observers have had in understanding Trump, is that they have been making a category error in trying to make sense of Trump by the normal means of fact-based interpretation. Back in 2016, the media was told by conservatives, like journalist Salena Zito and far-right billionaire Peter Thiel, to take Trump “seriously, not literally.” But this formula does not get to the heart of the matter. Following the Jan. 6 attack, I wrote that “Trump’s supporters were not taking his words either literally or seriously, they were taking them mythically.”

What Trump has sought to do ever since he descended the Trump Tower escalator ― whether he knew it himself or not ― is to supplant our country’s national political mythos and replace it with his own new spin on a very old story.

The Electric Cord

In the U.S., our politics operate on the foundation of a number of myths that hold varying interpretations to different social groups. For example, the myth of the American Founding, that guides fidelity to the original principles set forth at the beginning of the nation in the present; and the Frontier Myth, wherein the vast lands and resources to be taken from native peoples provided “a gate of escape from the bondage of the past” in order to forge a new American identity and yield unending growth, as Frederick Jackson Turner wrote in 1893.

But the key to understanding what Trump means is to look at the national myth that became the national creed following World War II in the 20th century: the “electric chord” that bound the nation, and that has since been broken.

The most well-known words in the American national idiom are those written by Thomas Jefferson in the Declaration of Independence: “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.”

Advertisement

A close second might be the brief speech Abraham Lincoln made to commemorate the cemetery at Gettysburg: “Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.”

Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address announced a revolution in American thought. Instead of locating the founding of the country with the 1787 adoption of the Constitution, 76 years prior, he argued that the nation’s true founding came with the adoption of the Declaration and its principle that “all men are created equal.” Instead of rooting national identity in white Anglo-Saxon heritage, he rooted it in principle. In calling for a “new birth of freedom,” he crafted a dramatic narrative that gave significance to the action Americans should take to fulfill their country’s promise. A myth.

"Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal," President Abraham Lincoln said at the Nov. 19, 1863, dedication of the cemetery at Gettysburg. via Associated Press

This myth denies that American nationhood and citizenship is defined by blood, national origin or religion. It is instead defined by belief in a principle ― an idea ― that says that all people are created equal and endowed with particular rights that exist prior to the establishment of the Constitution. Lincoln outlined this in prior speeches.

In 1858, Lincoln gave a speech in Chicago addressing how recent immigrants to the country could still be considered American. While they cannot “trace their connection” to the founding “by blood,” immigrants can “look through that old Declaration of Independence” and know “that they have a right to claim it as though they were blood of the blood, and flesh of the flesh of the men who wrote that Declaration.”

Advertisement

“That is the electric cord in that Declaration that links the hearts of patriotic and liberty-loving men together, that will link those patriotic hearts as long as the love of freedom exists in the minds of men throughout the world,” Lincoln said.

Lincoln’s myth did not take hold after the Civil War. It took until the second World War and its aftermath for it to become gospel.

This American Creed emerged as the consensus view of American nationalism in the 20th century. It came about due to the ideological nature of the war against Nazi Germany, domestic and international pressure to resolve the oppression of Black Americans, and a push for greater integration and acknowledgement of the immigrants who had immigrated in large numbers at the turn of the 20th century.

“Creedal nationalism was an attempt to explain the continuity of American institutions despite the transformation of its population,” Samuel Goldman writes in his 2021 book, “After Nationalism.”

“The nation could absorb so much immigration, liberal theorists reasoned, because its essence lay in ideas rather than in blood, soil, or religious confession.”

Advertisement

Franklin Roosevelt reflected this when he told the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1938 to “Remember, remember always that all of us, and you and I especially, are descended from immigrants and revolutionists.”

This national myth provided significance to the push for civil rights at home, the ending of immigration quotas and also foreign wars against supposed totalitarian foes.

Today, this myth is still expounded by politicians ― although largely from the Democratic Party.

"America is an idea," President Joe Biden said in his speech announcing his withdrawal from the 2024 election. Daniel Kucin Jr. via Associated Press

“America is an idea — an idea is stronger than any army, bigger than any ocean, more powerful than any dictator,” President Joe Biden said in announcing his withdrawal from the presidential race in July.

“The United States of America is the greatest idea humanity ever devised,” Vice President Kamala Harris said in her closing speech on the Ellipse on Oct. 29.

Advertisement

It is this myth that Trump and his allies are arrayed against.

Breaking The Cord

Despite occasional strategic nods to the Declaration as the source of the country’s meaning, Trump’s political career has been exemplified by a rejection of Lincoln’s creed. He and his allies have repeatedly sought to draw exclusionary lines on who is and isn’t an American, often on veiled or not-so veiled ethnic and racial grounds, and rejects Lincoln’s interpretation that the Declaration’s principle means that all men (and women) are created equal in the entire world. His promises to undo the 14th Amendment’s grant of birthright citizenship, which enshrined Lincoln’s interpretation of the Declaration into law, is no doubt the clearest example of his desire to reverse Lincoln’s myth.

His own vice presidential nominee Ohio Sen. JD Vance rather explicitly took on creedal interpretations of American identity in his acceptance speech where he drew a picture of his family’s cemetery plot in Kentucky.

“Seven generations of people who have fought for this country,” he said. “Who have built this country. Who have made things in this country. And who would fight and die to protect this country if they were asked to.”

“Now that’s not just an idea, my friends,” he added. “That’s not just a set of principles. Even though the ideas and the principles are great, that is a homeland. That is our homeland. People will not fight for abstractions, but they will fight for their home.”

Lincoln’s Gettysburg address consecrates the war cemetery not for the dead, who “have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract.” Instead, he uses it to call “the living” to be “dedicated” to ensure that “government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” To win the war that tested whether “any nation” that was “conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal … can long endure.”

Advertisement

Republican vice presidential candidate and Ohio Sen. JD Vance rebutted arguments that America is an idea in a speech that read as the antithesis of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. Li Rui/Xinhua News Agency via Getty Images

Vance’s framing would reject this entirely. His rhetoric claims that no one will “fight for abstractions” and instead will only fight for their “homeland.” What he describes is people joined to the soil and the blood of their ancestors. And what he rejects is people joined together by their common belief in an idea.

This is by no means new to American conservatism. The Lost Cause ideology that emerged out of the South following the Civil War explicitly rejected equality as the basis of American identity. This rejection of equality was joined by Northerners who saw inspiration in southern anti-Black racism to oppose and restrict immigration by non-“Nordic” Europeans. Conservative movement thinkers also strongly campaigned against a creedal interpretation of national identity in the 20th century ― instead claiming that freedom wasn’t meant for all, but to be limited by a consensus made by conservative white Americans.

But this strain largely remained submerged in the conservative movement, as the coalition that came together in the Republican Party cohere around the shared goal of opposition to communism amid the emergence of the Cold War. Anti-communism was expressed through the American Creed, as the foundation of the “Free World” in its fight against totalitarianism and what made America exceptional among all nations.

“America represents something universal in the human spirit,” Ronald Reagan said in 1989 before quoting a letter he said he received from a friend. That letter read, “You can go to Japan to live, but you cannot become Japanese. You can go to France to live and not become a Frenchman. You can go to live in Germany or Turkey, and you won’t become a German or a Turk. … Anybody from any corner of the world can come to America to live and become an American.”

Advertisement

Not long after Reagan’s departure from the political scene and the end of the Cold War, conservatives began reversing course. Pat Buchanan’s “culture war” speech at the 1992 Republican National Convention presaged Trump’s rhetoric in casting America as suffering from decadence and decline brought about by deference to Blacks, secularists, feminists, and gays and lesbians.

A “cultural war” was underway, Buchanan announced, that is “as critical to the kind of nation we shall be as was the Cold War itself, for this war is for the soul of America.” On one side he put Democrats Bill and Hillary Clinton, who supported “homosexual rights,” “abortion on demand,” “women in combat units,” and “radical feminism.” On the other were conservative Republicans, who he said still believed in “the Judeo-Christian values and beliefs upon which America was founded.”

Trump speaks during a Fox News town hall at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., on May 3, 2020. Oliver Contreras/Bloomberg via Getty Images

In 1997, after two consecutive presidential election losses for conservatives, the National Review published an essay by editor John O’Sullivan called After Reaganism that explicitly rejected the American Creed.

In it, he lamented as “absurd” and utopian “the neoconservative belief that America is not a country, but an idea — a ‘cre[e]dal nation’ held together not by ethnic links, cultural sympathies, or shared historical memories, but by conscious subscription to the liberal political ideas outlined in the Declaration of Independence and entrenched in the Constitution.”

Advertisement

Between then and Trump’s emergence, something happened. The significance of the creed began to come unglued.

Once used as the ideological inspiration for America’s foreign policies aimed at spreading democracy around the world, the myth crashed aground in Iraq after George W. Bush lied the country into an ill-thought out war of choice and implemented a torture policy that violated international law. In doing so, he defied global opinion and the institutions of the 20th century’s liberal international order.

Free trade deals that promised both a new frontier of unending growth and to eventually spread democracy through open markets decimated communities across the country in rapid succession while failing to make any country’s political system more democratic.

Myths only continue to exist as myths when they hold significance for a particular social group. “A political myth can be defined as the work of a common narrative by which the members of a social group (or society) provide significance to their political experience and deeds,” Chiara Boticci writes in her book, “The Philosophy of Political Myth.”

And that becomes evident in its absence, too: Amid multiple crises and changing material conditions in the country, the American creedal myth that long sustained the country seemingly ceased to provide meaning for many Americans.

Advertisement

MAGA Myth And Beyond

Trump moved to fill the vacuum with a narrative of decadence, decline and civilizational collapse that he “alone” could fix. This apocalyptic vision mobilized supporters to believe that the end times were not just nigh, but already happening. That they needed to “root out the communists, Marxists, fascists and the radical left thugs that live like vermin within the confines of our country that lie and steal and cheat on elections.”

“I will give you everything,” Trump said in 2016. “I will give you what you’ve been looking for 50 years. I’m the only one.”

This myth of decline and promise of retribution and salvation provides meaning and justification for a non-majoritarian conservatism that has lost the popular presidential vote in seven out of the last eight elections and no longer believes it can coexist with liberals. Anything is permissible in the face of such decline, including minority rule and, if need be, overturning the will of the people. “The people are corrupt,” wrote the Trumpist intellectual Michael Anton.

There are “many native-born people who may technically be citizens of the United States but are no longer (if they ever were) Americans,” Glenn Elmers wrote in a 2021 piece titled Conservatism Is No Longer Enough.

Elmers called for “overturning the existing post-American order” by “counter-revolution” and exhorted his readers to start lifting weights because “strong people are harder to kill.”

Advertisement

“As they are opposed to humanity itself, they place themselves outside of the category completely, in an entirely new misery-driven subdivision, the unhuman,” far-right conspiracist Jack Posobiec writes in his 2024 book “Unhumans,” which goes on to praise fascist dictator Francisco Franco. (Vance blurbed Posobiec’s book: “Jack Posobiec and Joshua Lisec reveal their plans and show us what to do to fight back.”)

What does one do with “vermin,” “the enemy within,” “unhumans,” and people who are “no longer American?” The question answers itself.

The Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol was the culmination of Trump's myth. His narrative of decline provided the grounding to justify violence. Brent Stirton via Getty Images

This has antecedents in the American tradition, most notably in the Lost Cause and the anti-immigration movements of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Following the South’s loss in the Civil War, southern partisans crafted a narrative of civilizational collapse caused by the efforts of Reconstruction to provide freed Blacks equal rights ― including voting rights ― under the law. This mythos emphasized the need for violent rebellion through vigilantism to restore a traditional way of life (white supremacy) that had been taken by an illegitimate government. It sought to “idealize the social order of the Old South, and to justify a new phase of political violence to restore that order,” Richard Slotkin, author of “A Great Disorder: National Myth And The Battle For America,” writes. The Lost Cause would provide narrative power to the establishment of the Jim Crow system, and the violence enacted against anyone who dared challenge it or, worst of all, try to exercise their legal rights.

Beyond the South, Northerners pressed a similar ideology against migrant communities, applying the anti-Black racism of the South to the increasing numbers of immigrants moving to Northern cities in search of jobs in the growing industrial economy.

“Universal suffrage” for freed Blacks, “swarms of foreigners” and women “is destructive both to the purity and significance of the ballot,” so no one “can place any faith in that form of suffrage,” Charles Francis Adams Jr. wrote in 1869.

These exclusionary narratives have been used time after time to maintain racial and ethnic hierarchies, and perpetrate human rights abuses.

And that is what is, again, at stake today as Trump resurrects this mythical narrative of an exclusionary state for our time.

This narrative of victimization and decline provides the grounding for the policies he hopes to enact. That includes a sweeping mass deportation campaign never before seen in the country that is aimed at legal and undocumented immigrants alike. This program will no doubt sweep up U.S. citizens into its net and violate constitutional and human rights. He has called for investigations and prosecutions of political opponents, election workers, and anyone who stands in his way. He wants to deploy the military to crush any sign of protest against his rule. And he has shown that he does not believe that Americans who do not vote for him should have their votes counted.

Advertisement

Trump’s “MAGA-dominated Republican Party [is] determined to fight for its cultural Lost Cause … [while] the prevalence of ethnonationalism in MAGA ideology threatens the solidarity of the nation as a community; its authoritarian and illiberal characters threatens to override the rules and structures that have governed democratic politics,” Slotkin writes.

While Trump has provided a narrative myth to provide significance and justification for action in the face of the collapse of the country’s existing national myth, liberals have not found a new way to explain what the country should mean.

It is not that liberals or the left should jettison Lincoln’s myth in the Gettysburg Address. Rather, they must translate its meaning for a new generation.

The attempts to create national unity under a foreign policy of democracy promotion seen in Ukraine have failed, while the dumb, deaf and blind support for Israeli war crimes in Gaza, the West Bank and Lebanon have further proved the shattered nature of the liberal international order that is supposedly upheld by the world’s democracies. It is time for something different.

To counter the forces of myth propelling Trump, liberals and the left must not abandon the idea that this country is conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. They must recall that they exist in the context of all that came before, but also aim to be unburdened by what has been.
States and cities beef up security to prepare for potential election-related violence

toggle caption Brendan Smialowski/AFP via Getty Images

Some cities and states are preparing for potential election-related violence, though so far, tens of millions of ballots have been cast without serious incident.

Washington Gov. Jay Inslee on Friday announced the activation of some members of the state's National Guard to be on standby status in case they are asked to help local law enforcement. The governor said Guard members could be called on to protect "vital infrastructure" for elections and to "respond to any unrest" related to the election.

Guard members will be on standby status until the end of Thursday, according to the governor's order. The state's top military official is determining the number of members needed.

Sponsor Message

"This is a purely precautionary measure taken in response to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s nationwide warnings regarding threats to election infrastructure and other recent activities that have occurred in southwestern Washington," Inslee's office said in a statement.

Across the river in Portland, Ore., police said they were "increasing staffing on Election Day and the days following as a precaution." Still, they said they were not aware of any threats related to the election.

The announcements come after ballot drop boxes in Portland and nearby Vancouver, Wash., were set on fire last week. A few ballots were damaged in the Portland drop box, while the fire damaged hundreds of ballots in the Vancouver box. Authorities are still searching for the perpetrator.

In Nevada, Gov. Joe Lombardo's office said 60 National Guard members would be activated "on standby status" and stationed in Las Vegas and Carson City. He said the activation is similar to that of previous elections. Guard members could be used to help local law enforcement with traffic enforcement and building security, the governor's office said in a statement.

Lombardo echoed other officials in saying that the activation was only as a precaution.

In Washington, D.C., Metropolitan Police Chief Pamela Smith said the police will "stand up a full activation," meaning all police would be working 12-hour shifts "and depending on what happens, maybe a little longer, to ensure that we have enough officers on the street and every corner of our city." She said the city could call in law enforcement from other jurisdictions for assistance if needed.

toggle caption Kent Nishimura/Getty Images

Other security measures have been taken throughout the city. Fencing around the White House and the Naval Observatory (which contains the vice president's residence) was increased. Some businesses near the White House boarded up windows as a precaution, local media reported.

Sponsor Message

D.C. police announced road closures around Howard University for Vice President Harris' election night watch party. Extra physical security measures are also being added to the Palm Beach County Convention Center where former President Donald Trump's campaign will hold its party, the Secret Service said.

"These enhancements are not in response to any specific issue but are part of wide-ranging public safety preparations for Tuesday's election," the agency told NPR.

Three organizations representing sheriffs across the country said in a joint statement last week that they had been preparing for the election for a year and a half. The Major County Sheriffs of America, National Sheriffs’ Association and the Major Cities Chiefs Association said they "stand ready and united to ensure that Election Day 2024 is secure, safe, and fair."

Despite the lack of widespread violence so far, many people across the country are concerned about the potential. In an NPR/PBS News/Marist poll released on Monday, 72% of likely voters said they were concerned about violence as a result of the election.
Why these women are secretly voting for Harris. And, how to avoid election misinfo

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.



Today's top stories

Former President Donald Trump and Vice President Harris embark on their last leg of the presidential campaign today as they race across the swing states. Yesterday, Harris focused on Michigan. Before that, she made a stop in New York City to play herself on Saturday Night Live. Trump turned things up with three rallies yesterday and Saturday. They will continue the momentum today with a slew of rallies going late into the evening.

toggle caption Angela Weiss/AFP via Getty Images; Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images

🎧 North Carolina is a significant swing state for Trump , NPR’s Franco Ordoñez, who has been traveling with him, tells Up First. Trump won the state twice in the presidential election, but it’s now very competitive. Trump has spent more time in North Carolina than in Pennsylvania, indicating it is a must-win state for him. Trump has four rallies today: one in North Carolina, two in Pennsylvania and one in Grand Rapids, Mich.

, NPR’s Franco Ordoñez, who has been traveling with him, tells Up First. Trump won the state twice in the presidential election, but it’s now very competitive. Trump has spent more time in North Carolina than in Pennsylvania, indicating it is a must-win state for him. Trump has four rallies today: one in North Carolina, two in Pennsylvania and one in Grand Rapids, Mich. 🎧 Harris’ campaign believes it’s gaining ground with college-educated voters, suburbanites and women, which are key groups in North Carolina, NPR’s Asma Khalid says. Today, Harris will be in Pennsylvania, showing how vital the state is for Democrats.

college-educated voters, suburbanites and women, which are key groups in North Carolina, NPR’s Asma Khalid says. Today, Harris will be in Pennsylvania, showing how vital the state is for Democrats. ➡️ Both candidates will be in Reading, Pa. today , the city with the highest percentage of Latinos in the state.

, the city with the highest percentage of Latinos in the state. ➡️ Republicans are favored to control the Senate thanks to a 2024 election map. Here are the races to watch.

Sponsor Message

Boeing’s striking machinists vote today on the company’s latest contract proposal. This comes after weeks of the strike and two previously rejected offers. Union leaders are supporting the new agreement, cautioning that members could end up with less if they choose not to accept it.



🎧 NPR’s Joel Rose says Boeing is offering a 38% wage hike and a $12,000 ratification bonus. However, the company has not agreed to one key demand: the restoration of the traditional pension plan that was frozen in 2014 during the last contract negotiations. Boeing says the pension plan is too expensive.

In political ads and campaign speeches, a message has been directed toward Republican women, reminding them that their votes are private. This means no one will know if they vote for Harris in secret. The ads aim to reach conservative-leaning women like T— identified only by her first initial — who feels that living in a politically divided household is affecting her marriage of over 40 years. To avoid confrontation, she mailed her absentee ballot from the home of another family member. Here is what she and other conservative women keeping their votes for Harris confidential have to say.



Life advice

toggle caption DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images

Election Day is tomorrow. As we wait for the final results, it can be easy to be duped by misleading information. Here are some tips to avoid spreading false election-related information:



Sponsor Message

🗳️ Keep in mind results can shift dramatically throughout election night, depending on which ballots are counted first.

results can shift dramatically throughout election night, depending on which ballots are counted first. 🗳️ Misleading information is often created to confuse or provoke an emotional reaction. If you feel this, it may be a sign to slow down, pause and do some research.

confuse or provoke an emotional reaction. If you feel this, it may be a sign to slow down, pause and do some research. 🗳️ Consider how trustworthy your source is. If you don’t see multiple news outlets reporting a story, it is a sign to wait before sharing.

Click here for more things to consider to avoid spreading misinformation.

Picture show

toggle caption Luke Dray for NPR

The ongoing conflict in Sudan between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the powerful paramilitary group called the Rapid Support Forces has severely affected much of the country. Omdurman, once the cultural heart of Sudan, was known for its rich history, including monuments, mausoleums and universities. In May, the SAF declared that they had "liberated" Omdurman after intense clashes that ended several months of RSF occupation. Since then, hundreds of people arrived daily, but the peace they find in Omdurman is only relative.



📷 See photos of what life is like within the city.

3 things to know before you go

Enlarge this image toggle caption Chris Delmas/AFP via Getty Images Chris Delmas/AFP via Getty Images

Quincy Jones, who produced Michael Jackson’s Thriller album and performed with stars such as Ray Charles, Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley, died yesterday. He was 91. Abdi Nageeye of the Netherlands claimed victory in the New York City Marathon men’s race yesterday. It was the 35-year-old's fourth attempt at the race. Brian Perkins started using a cane a few years ago. He refused a stranger's help at the laundromat one day, despite having more clothes than he could carry to his car. His unsung hero’s surprising actions and words changed his life forever.

This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.
How has the Electoral College survived, despite being perennially unpopular?

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

Every presidential election cycle, constitutional law expert Alison LaCroix can count on people asking her one question when they learn what she does for a living.

“Why do we have the Electoral College?” she says she's asked — again and again. “It's good news in terms of people being aware that it exists,” says LaCroix, who teaches law and history at the University of Chicago, “but bad news in the sense that people feel like, ‘Why does it exist, and is it useful?’”

A majority of Americans — more than 60% — support abolishing the Electoral College, according to a September report by the Pew Research Center. But the system has survived an unprecedented number of attempts to change it.

Sponsor Message

“There have been more proposals for Constitutional amendments on changing the Electoral College than on any other subject,” according to the National Archives, citing more than 700 efforts to dismantle the process.

Backers of the Electoral College idea say the system balances power among large and small states, brings stability, and is an obstacle to demagogues. But critics call the Electoral College an indirect process that’s undemocratic and rooted in racism. It’s also the reason we have swing states.

“From the perspective of 2024, you know, it doesn't seem ‘small-d’ democratic to have this sort of intermediate body between the people voting and the ultimate decision,” says LaCroix, who has written a historical analysis of the U.S. Constitution.

Here’s a quick guide:



How does the Electoral College work?

toggle caption ‎/AP

“When voters cast their ballots for a candidate for president of the United States, they are actually voting for the presidential electors who were selected by that candidate’s party,” according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

On ballots around the country, names like “Donald Trump” and “Kamala Harris” actually represent slates of electors — members of the Electoral College who are pledged to vote for that candidate.

There are 538 members of the Electoral College nationwide: one for each state’s members of Congress, and three more for the District of Columbia. That’s where the presidential election’s famous number comes from: The candidate with at least 270 electoral votes (a majority) wins. As we’ve seen in some previous elections, that candidate doesn’t have to win the popular vote.

Despite its substantial-sounding name, the Electoral College is neither a place nor a permanent body: It’s more of a process. In each state, political parties designate their own slate of potential electors before the November general election.

Nearly every state and the District of Columbia have a winner-take-all policy, meaning only those electors tied to a candidate who won the popular vote in their state will send their ballots to the Capitol. Maine and Nebraska divide the ballots, giving two “at-large” electoral votes to the state’s overall winner but also one for each congressional district won.

The electors then gather in mid-December to cast their votes for president and vice president, sending the results to Congress.

Congress then certifies the votes, on Jan. 6. If there’s a tie, the House of Representatives would hold a contingent election to choose the president.

A presidential candidate can win the Electoral College vote but lose the popular vote: it happened in 2016 and 2000, and several times in the 1800s.



Sponsor Message

Who are the electors?

In most states, the two main parties choose slates of potential electors either at their conventions or by committee votes. They’re often people who play prominent roles in state government or are longstanding party members.

Each state’s legislature determines how electors are chosen — but there are two main restrictions: They can’t be federal government workers; and they can’t be members of Congress.

Federal law doesn’t require electors to vote in a way that reflects that results in their state, but 37 states have laws requiring them to do so, according to the NCSL. The organization says the 2016 election saw seven “faithless” electors — including five Democratic electors who refused to cast their votes for Hillary Clinton — the most since 1972.

Despite their power, electors’ identities aren’t usually widely known outside of their state. Unlike members of Congress, there isn’t a centralized list of all the states’ electors, according to the Office of the Federal Register.



The Framers opted against a popular vote

toggle caption Matthew Hatcher/Getty Images

The country’s framers saw the Electoral College as a way to balance a lot of competing motivations, from the separation of federal powers to states not wanting to cede power, to concerns of unequal power between the states due to population differences (and for some, not wanting to risk losing slavery). LaCroix says even at the time, in the 1780s when this decision was made at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, the delegates chose “an unusual body.”

The Constitution’s framers were also dubious about a popular vote, concerned on one hand that the country was too large for the public to make an informed choice on a leader — and on the other, that a direct system could help a demagogue rise to power.

They also considered, but dismissed, the idea of having Congress choose the president, similar to Great Britain’s parliamentary system. But at the Convention, Gouverneur Morris — who argued for a popular vote — warned that if the legislature picked the president, “it will be the work of intrigue, of cabal, and of faction.”

Sponsor Message

But some Convention attendees also believed candidates would likely fail to gain national support outside their region, leaving Congress to decide the presidency.

“And then they say, well, what about an intermediate body, which becomes the Electoral College,” LaCroix says. “[It] solves the problem of the president being too beholden to Congress. It's a temporary body. It's not some entity that has ongoing power. And they thought that was appealing.”

A further sign of the Electoral College’s ephemeral nature: The term isn’t mentioned in the Constitution.



Why do some call the Electoral College a relic of racism?

toggle caption Tim Sloan/AFP

At the Convention, Southern states successfully argued for using enslaved people’s population numbers to bolster their power in Congress, claiming that each slave should be counted as 3/5 of a person — but not have the right to vote — when calculating representation.

A direct popular vote for the presidency would undermine that power. But if the Electoral College were to be based on representation in Congress, the Three Fifths Compromise’s amplification of Southern political power would carry over into choosing the president. The dynamic has been a force in presidential elections ever since.

“That's a problem with the Electoral College today, is it just sort of refracts too much power to small states,” LaCroix says. “And some of it is about smaller states — or states that were, like Georgia and South Carolina, really concerned about protecting slavery” in the new Constitution.

The Civil War and the 13th Amendment ended the Three Fifths era. But for decades afterward, Southern states worked to suppress and dilute Black voters’ impact. Today, the Electoral College’s critics say that its winner-take-all aspect is still harmful.

“You see the impact, for example, in the South right now,” Jesse Wegman, author of the book Let The People Pick The President: The Case For Abolishing The Electoral College, told NPR’s Fresh Air in 2020. Wegman says millions of Black citizens’ votes in Southern states are simply drowned out by white majorities.

Sponsor Message

“You see these patterns replicating themselves throughout our history,” he said. “The people who stopped the popular vote amendment in the late 1960s were Southern segregationists. Some of the people who prevented us from getting to a popular vote in the founding of the country were slave holders. Again and again the pattern repeats itself.”



The House overwhelmingly voted to abolish the Electoral College in 1969

toggle caption Mark Makela/Getty Images

Going back more than 50 years, a majority of voters have supported doing away with the Electoral College.

“Public opinion polls have shown Americans favored abolishing it by majorities of 58 percent in 1967; 81 percent in 1968; and 75 percent in 1981,” according to the National Archives.

Momentum to replace the Electoral College got a boost in 1968, when Richard Nixon notched a razor-thin win of the popular vote — after earlier concerns that segregationist George Wallace’s third-party candidacy might siphon enough electoral votes to prevent a clear majority.

Sen. Birch Bayh led a push to amend the Constitution, and in September of 1969, the House voted 339–70 to adopt the measure. But the amendment languished in the Senate.

“Led by Southern senators but helped by some very conservative Midwestern Republicans, the proposal is defeated by a filibuster,” as Harvard Kennedy School professor Alex Keyssar told NPR’s Throughline ahead of the 2020 election.

Segregationists weren’t the only ones who wanted to preserve the Electoral College. Some Black leaders, such as Vernon Jordan, argued in the 1970s that Black voters could wield political power as “swing” election deciders. But many of those leaders later opted to support a popular vote.



There’s an ongoing debate over whether to replace the Electoral College

The college’s supporters include the conservative Heritage Foundation, which says it prevents presidential candidates from focusing only on winning votes from high-population and urban areas, thus addressing “the Founders’ fears of a ‘tyranny of the majority,” according to its website.

Sponsor Message

The Heritage Foundation also says the Electoral College tends to magnify the margin of victory, imparting a mandate to govern; and “has the added benefit of eschewing radical candidates for more moderate ones.”

Even experts who want change also warn that some of the impacts could be unpredictable.

For instance, Akhil Reed Amar, a law professor at Yale University, told NPR’s Throughline that running a new, national direct election would bring complications — from what central federal authority oversees it to how to get 50 states to agree on the rules.

But, Amar added, “Here's my best argument for why we should have reform: equality. One person, one vote. Each person's vote should count the same…. One person, one vote is a powerful affirmation of equality.”

In the face of high federal hurdles such as a constitutional amendment, there is a push for change at the state level.

Under the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact, states adopt legislation requiring them to award their electors’ votes to whichever presidential candidate wins the popular vote nationwide. The mechanism would kick in once enough states join the compact to decide a presidential election.

As of this year, National Popular Vote legislation has become law in 17 states and D.C., reflecting 209 electoral votes. In 2023, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz signed his state’s version of the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact. This year, Maine also joined the group.

The legislation “has also passed at least one legislative chamber in 7 states possessing 74 electoral votes (Arkansas, Arizona, Michigan, North Carolina, Nevada, Oklahoma, Virginia),” according to the National Popular Vote website.

The compact needs to add states holding 61 more electoral votes to trigger the change.
If you’re just emerging from six months under a rock, we have some news for you: The election is Tuesday, and it’s a toss-up. Seven swing states will decide whether Kamala Harris or Donald Trump is sworn in as the next president in January, and their polling averages are all within the margin of error. In an election this close, small constituencies really matter.

In Michigan, that has meant a focus on its Arab American community, which numbers more than 200,000. Long a reliable Democratic constituency, many of these voters are furious with the Biden administration for its handling of Israel’s war in Gaza and now Lebanon. Trump has been trying to take advantage of this: He has welcomed the endorsement of the mayor of a majority Arab American suburb of Detroit, as well as the endorsement of some local imams.

But the biggest beneficiary of Arab American anger at Democrats may be Green Party candidate Jill Stein. Among American Muslims, Stein is tied with Harris, with Trump a distant third, according to a new nationwide poll by the Council on American-Islamic Relations.

The Election, Explained A pop-up newsletter explaining the 2024 election — the candidates, the issues that matter most, and how it will all impact your life. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Still, many Democrats see a vote for Stein as a vote for Trump. And if Stein is able to peel off enough Arab American voters, it could cost Harris Michigan — and the election. “If you told me it’s the morning after the election and Michigan has made the difference, I would say the most likely scenario is that Democratic weakness among Arab American voters and Black voters showed up,” Matt Grossmann, director of the Institute for Public Policy and Social Research at Michigan State University, told Today, Explained co-host Noel King late last week.

Below is an excerpt of their conversation, edited for length and clarity. There’s much more in the full podcast, so listen to Today, Explained wherever you get your podcasts, including Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Noel King

What is Kamala Harris’s closing argument?

Matt Grossmann

Well, there is a bit of dissent within the Harris campaign and the broader Democratic apparatus. The Democratic super PAC, which has tested hundreds of messages, has repeatedly come back and said that the most effective messages are about Harris herself and about Harris’s economic policy proposals. But the campaign has remained somewhat focused, while including that message, on threats to democracy and the threat of Donald Trump. So it will be interesting to see which one they emphasize more at the end. This is the most money that has been spent in a presidential race, so they really do have the money. But the message is a little bit different in the ads than it is from the candidate herself.

Noel King

What is the economic message in Michigan specifically?

Matt Grossmann

The Democrats believe that they made a mistake in 2016 by running the same ads that they ran nationally. … Since then, they have made an effort to really target the Michigan auto industry. That was not new. In 2012, Barack Obama’s campaign was all about the auto bailout and “Mitt Romney was going to close your factories.” So they believe the 2016 move was a problem. In 2020 and 2024, and really throughout the Biden administration, they have been repeatedly focused on the auto industry, on union support, coming back to talk about factory retooling, about support for infrastructure. They’ve been here a lot, talking about Michigan-specific concerns.

Noel King

How are residents of Michigan responding to that?

Matt Grossmann

In general, positively. Certainly, there’s no concern that Michigan has been left out or that the Harris or the Biden administration have ignored Michigan. But Republicans have come up with a useful counterattack on the auto industry, which is that, overall, the electric vehicle transition is not going to be great for Michigan. And so while Democrats want to get your traditional bonus from showing up to a ribbon-cutting, saying we’re opening a new factory or doing a big factory retooling investment, Republicans have come back and said, really, this is DC trying to impose an electric vehicle transition that the industry wouldn’t otherwise be moving forward with.

Noel King

In the first half of the show, we talked to Khalil AlHajal. He’s an opinion editor at the Free Press, and he told us that the Arab American community in and around Detroit is very angry at the Democratic Party. How much do you think this will hurt Kamala Harris?

Matt Grossmann

It is a small part of the voting population as a whole, but it is one that could swing in a strong direction this year. We have this perception that Arab American voters are liberals overall, that they are concerned about this one issue and willing to sit it out or vote for a third-party candidate. But that’s really not representative of the Arab American population as a whole. They have actually been more of a swing vote than people might think.

For example, in the 2022 midterm election, the Dearborn area actually moved toward the Republicans while the rest of the state was moving toward the Democrats. It had to do with a controversy over LGBT books in schools and over general post-pandemic school policy.

It’s a constituency that has a lot of people who are socially conservative. It also has a lot of small-business owners and people who are economically conservative. And yet, since 9/11, [Arab Americans] have viewed the Democratic Party as their home, as the party that supports them and the Republican Party as the party that opposes them. So it’ll be interesting to see, not only if you get lower support for the Democrats this time, but [if there’s] actually increase in Trump’s support, even though it might seem odd given that Trump’s position on Israel is at least as, if not more, pro-Netanyahu than the Biden administration.

Noel King

The other demographic that you mentioned that Kamala Harris has had some trouble with is Black voters. We’ve covered this all year long. Black men in particular are interested in Donald Trump in greater numbers than before. What specifically is Kamala Harris failing to do with this demographic? Or maybe a better way of putting it is: Say that in the days after the election, we learn that Black men did turn toward Donald Trump. Is that something that the Trump campaign did right or that the Harris campaign did wrong?

Matt Grossmann

Maybe neither. These are long-term trends in progress. The age gradient on the white vote is that the older you are, the more likely you are to be conservative and a Republican voter. But it’s actually reversed among Black voters. The younger you are, the more likely you are to be a Republican because [you’re] losing the tie that the Democrats had to Black voters from the civil rights movement. So in some ways, it is part of an ideological realignment or an educational realignment that may be happening regardless of the candidates.

Biden was losing Black voters and had a bigger reduction in support among Black voters than Harris does now. Harris has actually improved her standing among Black voters, including Black men, compared to Biden this summer. So I don’t think we can say this was about any particular attribute of Harris. It’s more about the reaction of the Black community to four years of the Biden administration and the continuing distance from civil rights history.

There are a lot of Black voters that self-identify as conservatives, have conservative positions on social issues and economic issues, and still vote Democratic. And the explanation that’s usually given is that there is still a social tie to the Democratic Party, social pressure within the Black community to support Democrats. It brings along people who are really pretty conservative. So if they lose pretty conservative voters who disagree with the Democrats on most issues, it’s hard to say whether that was the fault of the Democrats or the credit of the Republicans.

Noel King

All right. Let’s talk about Donald Trump. What is his closing argument to the great state of Michigan?

Matt Grossmann

Well, there’s what the campaign is running on the airwaves, which I take to be the poll-tested research-supported message, which is clearly just comparing the Biden administration to the Trump administration. It’s just, were you better off under the Trump administration or under the Biden administration? And in Michigan, there’s a particular gain to talking about nostalgic politics, talking about the way things used to be, because we’re a state that used to be in the top 15 or 20 in income in the US and are now in the bottom 10 or 15. So it’s a place that really did think that things were better before, at least in economic terms.

And so Trump’s message is the same nationally, but has a chance to land with Michigan. [But] it’s hard to get the candidate on the same message, especially with Trump.

Noel King

And what’s Donald Trump’s message to the auto industry?

Matt Grossmann

The Republicans have at least been effective at countering the Democratic message that they’re investing in the auto industry by saying, “This is about the imposition of environmental values and constraints on the auto industry that really isn’t going to be good for Michigan. It’s going to be better for China.” It’s certainly a continued emphasis on trade and immigration, although Michigan is a place where immigration is actually not as big of an issue in terms of the most important problem as in other states. So he really has to lean a little bit more on the economic message here.

Noel King

All right. So Michigan is a toss-up. Much of the country, the polls tell us, is a toss-up. What is the uncertainty in Michigan?

Matt Grossmann

It’s hard to say whether it’s uncertain because there’s a whole bunch of people who haven’t made up their mind or if it’s just uncertain because we’re not great at polling. I do want to hold out that second possibility. We could have the election and it could be six points more to the Harris side or six points more to the Trump side, which would look in our times like a landslide. And that would just be an average polling error.

It probably is not the case that if that happens it’s because a whole bunch of people just made up their mind at the end. It is instead that we were just wrong all along. And I’m not picking on the pollsters. We have our own survey of Michigan. It shows Harris up five. So, you know, if that turns out to be right, I won’t even necessarily believe that the poll was right internally. We may have just gotten lucky.

But I do think it’s important to say that we are divided as a country, as a state. It’s been 40 years since a presidential candidate won by 10 points or more. We just have not had landslide elections. We have been fighting in the middle for a shrinking number of voters who haven’t made up their mind between the two sides. And there’s not any easy way out of this two-sided system.
is a senior correspondent at Vox. He covers a wide range of political and policy issues with a special focus on questions that internally divide the American left and right. Before coming to Vox in 2024, he wrote a column on politics and economics for New York Magazine.

Kamala Harris speaks during a campaign rally at the Craig Ranch Amphitheater in Las Vegas, Nevada, on October 31, 2024. Brendan Smialowski/AFP via Getty Images

Support independent journalism that matters — become a Vox Member today.

Editor’s note, November 6, 6 am ET: Donald Trump has won the 2024 presidential election. For more of our 2024 campaign coverage, click here.

The 2024 presidential race is the closest on record. Donald Trump and Kamala Harris are separated by 1 percentage point or less both nationally and in the decisive battleground states. In the Electoral College, the two candidates are essentially tied, with the election turning on a deadlocked Pennsylvania, according to the New York Times’s polling average.

If one looks beyond the polling data, however, it is not difficult to tell a story about why each candidate is actually the favorite. Here are four reasons you should expect Trump to win the presidency Tuesday, and five to expect a Harris victory instead.

Why you should expect a Trump win

1) Polls are liable to underestimate him again because his voters won’t pick up the phone

In 2016 and 2020, polls badly underestimated Trump’s support, particularly in battleground states. There are reasons to fear that pollsters will miss in the same direction yet again.

One leading theory of pollsters’ recent woes goes like this: Americans who participate in surveys are systematically different — and more Democratic — than those who do not.

If you are highly politically engaged, very trustful of strangers, or both, then you’re going to be more inclined to respond to a phone call or text message from a pollster. After all, people who are eager to discuss politics are more liable to share their voting intentions when prompted. And those who aren’t wary of other people are more likely to engage with an unsolicited request for conversation.

This has always been true to an extent. But in the past, Republican voters weren’t dramatically less likely than Democratic ones to be highly engaged or trustful. Trump’s conquest of the GOP changed this. As Republicans unified behind a populist, anti-system conspiracy theorist, they made inroads with less politically active and trusting voters, while Democrats racked up large gains with college-educated voters, who have relatively high turnout rates and levels of social trust.

Throughout the past year, there have been signs that this realignment has continued apace, with Trump polling much better among low-propensity voters than reliable ones. And some pollsters are finding it much easier to reach Democrats than Republicans as a result. Nate Cohn, chief pollster for the New York Times, writes that white Democrats were 16 percent more likely than white Republicans to participate in his final surveys.

There are many ways for pollsters to counteract this bias, but the fundamental challenge it poses may prove insurmountable. You can try to make sure that low-propensity voters (i.e., those who sat out recent elections) are well-represented in your survey. But as Cohn notes, in his polls of previous elections, low-propensity voters that agreed to participate ultimately voted at much higher rates than such voters in general. Put differently: The politically disengaged voters who respond to polls are not representative of such voters, as they are more politically active (and thus, theoretically, more Democratic). This isn’t entirely surprising since the very act of taking a poll is a form of political engagement.

Pollsters don’t want to underestimate Trump again. But the inescapable limitations of their methods may lead them to make the same mistake thrice.

2) Incumbent parties in virtually every country are losing

Since the onset of post-pandemic inflation in 2022, incumbents the world over have struggled to retain power. Ruling parties have either lost seats or control of government altogether in Japan, Austria, Britain, Italy, and Germany, among other nations. And if polls hold steady, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s governing Liberal Party is poised to suffer a landslide defeat in next year’s Canadian election.

Americans appear to share this transcontinental desire for change. Both NBC News and YouGov find roughly 65 percent of Americans saying America is on “the wrong track,” while 26 percent say they’re “satisfied with the way things are going in the United States” in Gallup’s polling.

Harris has tried to sell herself as a change candidate, centering her campaign on the slogan, “We’re not going back.” But she is still the sitting vice president, and Trump’s team has worked relentlessly to link her to the exceptionally unpopular commander-in-chief.

President Joe Biden’s approval rating is currently 18 points underwater. And as CNN’s Harry Enten notes, since World War II, whenever a retiring president has had a net-negative approval rating, their desired successor has lost: Adlai Stevenson failed to overcome Harry Truman’s unpopularity in 1952, Hubert Humphrey couldn’t withstand Lyndon Johnson’s in 1968, and John McCain was undone by George W. Bush’s in 2008.

Thus, if undecided voters — like their peers abroad — are in a mood for change on Election Day, one might expect them to break for Trump.

3) More voters identify as Republican than Democratic for the first time in decades

For virtually all of the past 30 years, more voters have identified as Democratic than Republican in Gallup’s surveys. Now, the GOP boasts a 3-point lead on national party identification.

There has been a strong correlation historically between this figure and election outcomes: In 2004 and 2016, when Democrats’ lead on partisan identity was slim, Republicans won the presidency. By contrast, when Democrats’ advantage on this measure was larger than normal — as in 1992, 1996, 2008, 2012, and 2020 — they won the White House.

Gallup isn’t alone in detecting a historically unusual advantage for Republicans in partisan self-identification. NBC News and Pew Research found the same result. And this shift toward the GOP has also surfaced in some states’ voter registration data: In Pennsylvania, there were 630,000 more registered Democrats than registered Republicans in March 2021. By October 2024, that advantage had fallen by more than half to around 300,000, according to NBC News.

4) Voters trust Republicans more on the issues they care about most

Polls have routinely found voters rating the economy and immigration as two of their top issues, and favoring the GOP on both. Further, when Gallup recently asked voters which party is better able to handle the issue that matters to them most — whatever that issue may be — they trusted the Republicans over the Democrats by a 46 percent to 41 percent margin.

In the past 75 years, no political party has won the presidency while trailing on this question in Gallup’s poll.

Why you should expect a Harris win

1) She has a higher favorability rating

Harris is significantly more popular than Trump: Voters disapprove of the Democratic nominee by roughly 2 points while they disapprove of the Republican one by roughly 9 points, according to FiveThirtyEight’s polling average.

As CNN’s Enten notes, since 1956, the more popular candidate has won the White House 16 out of 17 times (the one exception was Trump in 2016).

2) Pollsters have an incentive to err on the side of underestimating her

As noted above, it’s possible that pollsters are doomed to perpetually underestimate Trump’s support due to his disproportionate strength with the politically disengaged.

But it’s also quite possible that pollsters are overcorrecting for that problem. Certainly, every polling firm has a strong incentive to avoid understating Trump’s support for a third election in a row. The reputational damage of missing in the other direction — by overestimating him — is liable to be less severe; it’s more understandable to make new mistakes than to repeat old ones.

There are many ways pollsters could yield to this incentive. Survey firms don’t publish their raw results. Rather, they each apply their own idiosyncratic series of weights to those results in an effort to make them more representative of the expected electorate. If your sample is more educated than American voters as a whole, for example, then you will increase the weight of responses from non-college-educated voters in your final tally.

This is undoubtedly necessary for generating accurate results. But it also gives pollsters a lot of freedom to bend their findings in a safer direction. If your initial result shows Harris winning Wisconsin by 7 points, you can adjust your weights until you have a finding that’s more in keeping with polling averages (and less likely to get your shop laughed at post-election). As Vanderbilt University political scientist Josh Clinton recently demonstrated, a pollster’s decisions about how to model the 2024 electorate can shift the results of a given survey by 8 points.

And there are signs that pollsters might be abusing their discretion. As NBC News reported last week, recent polls of the top seven swing states have shown an improbably close race: 124 of 321 surveys showed margins of 1 point or less.

The probability of so many polls showing such a small gap is extremely low, absent pollsters putting their thumbs on the scale. Even if Harris and Trump really are virtually tied in all major swing states, the inherent randomness of polling should produce a more varied series of results than we’re seeing. That suggests many pollsters are playing it safe and engineering results that conform to the consensus. If so, they could be erring on the side of underestimating Harris since that is reputationally safer than underestimating Trump.

3) Democrats’ two biggest liabilities — inflation and immigration — have become less salient in recent months

Polls have long shown that voters trust Republicans over Democrats on inflation and immigration. And the surge in prices and border crossings under Biden coincided with the collapse of his approval rating.

Over the course of 2024, however, these issues have become less pressing. Inflation has fallen sharply over the past two years, and last week, the Federal Reserve’s favorite inflation indicator — the Personal Consumption Expenditures index — increased by just 2.1 percent, roughly in line with the central bank’s target rate.

At the same time, economic growth continues humming along at a roughly 3 percent rate, stocks have been hovering near record highs, and unemployment is low. And there are some signs that this is beginning to make an impression on voters: Some recent polls have shown Harris eroding Trump’s advantage on the economy.

Meanwhile, migrant encounters at the US-Mexico border dropped by 77 percent between December 2023 and August 2024, according to a recent analysis from the Pew Research Center. There’s no guarantee that improving objective conditions will change the electorate’s subjective impressions. But there is some evidence that immigration has receded a bit from the public’s consciousness in recent months: Between April and October, the share of voters naming immigration as America’s “most important problem” fell from 27 percent to 21 percent.

4) Her coalition shows up when it counts

As noted above, Democrats now do disproportionately well with America’s most politically engaged voters. That might lead polls to overrepresent Democratic voters. But all else equal, every political party would prefer to be popular with Americans who reliably vote in elections than with those who do not.

Democrats’ strength with the civic-minded has helped them dominate off-year special elections and hold their own in the 2022 midterms, despite public discontent with inflation and Biden.

There’s reason to think that Harris’s coalition might be even more reliable than Biden’s was in 2020, as some polls have shown her gaining ground with women and college-educated voters, both of whom turn out at elevated rates.

5) Late deciders are breaking toward Harris in some polls

Even if polls are perfectly accurate, they are likely to underestimate whichever candidate does best with voters who make their final decision on Election Day or just before it. And in the New York Times’s final battleground state polls, Harris led Trump by 9 points among voters who’d only recently picked their candidate.

This finding isn’t entirely surprising. The headlines in the campaign’s final weeks haven’t been ideal for Trump, with his former chief of staff calling him a fascist and his rally in Madison Square Garden convincing many Hispanic voters that he is a racist.

If late deciders are indeed breaking toward Harris, then she is likely to win the presidency.
Good morning, and welcome to election week! Tens of millions of people have already cast their ballots early, with tens of millions more bound for the polls tomorrow as Americans decide whether Vice President Kamala Harris or former President Donald Trump will be the next US president.

This story was first featured in the Today, Explained newsletter Understand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day. Sign up here.

And follow Today, Explained all week as we bring election results and analysis straight to your inbox, and our writers break down what the news means for the nation and for you.

But first, we’re setting the stage with a preview of the themes, races, and storylines that our politics and policy team will be looking at closely throughout the week.

Andrew Prokop, senior politics correspondent

I’ve been watching with growing alarm how Trump and the people around him are voicing certainty that he will win — and that, if he loses, it will mean the election was rigged. What I wonder is just how mobilized his supporters would end up being in the event of a narrow Harris win, just how far they’d go. As I wrote last week, there are some procedural and legal reasons to expect a Trump electoral challenge would be even less successful in 2024 than it was in 2020, but there is a real risk that ends up mattering less than force and partisanship.

Patrick Reis, senior politics and ideas editor

I’m curious to see how the vote breaks down among young men, particularly young men who are voting in their first election. While Kamala Harris does better with younger voters overall thanks to a massive advantage among young women, the New York Times/Siena College polls have found Donald Trump winning among young men overall (58 percent to 37 percent). There’s a reason Trump and JD Vance both went on Joe Rogan’s podcast — which is massively popular, especially among young men — and why Tim Walz appeared on a World of Warcraft Twitch stream. The campaigns are trying to find these voters where they are.

Rachel Cohen, policy correspondent

Ten states have abortion measures on their ballots, making it one of the biggest opportunities for voters to make their voices heard on the subject since the rollback of Roe v. Wade. Some could overturn sweeping state abortion bans, while others would strengthen protections against future restrictions on reproductive rights.

Among the most anticipated contests is Florida, where abortion is almost entirely banned. Advocates in Florida have raised over $100 million to restore access up to fetal viability — around 22 to 24 weeks — but the measure, known as Amendment 4, needs approval from 60 percent of voters, a high threshold to meet.

Zack Beauchamp, senior correspondent and author of Vox’s On the Right newsletter

There are two X factors that I’m looking for to determine whether Harris will outperform her polls. The first is North Carolina, a state where Trump is favored but Republicans have nominated a sure loser for governor: self-described “Black Nazi” Mark Robinson. Will Harris get a “reverse coattails” effect, where voters turn out to stop Robinson and vote for her, or will there be a lot of folks who split their tickets at the governor and state level?

The second is Puerto Rican voters in Pennsylvania. In the wake of the “floating island of garbage” comments, the Puerto Rican community seems to have mobilized to a degree I’m not sure I’ve ever seen this late in a presidential race. Given that there are about 473,000 Puerto Ricans in Pennsylvania alone, significant anti-Trump turnout in this group could end up being critical.

Christian Paz, senior politics reporter

It’s not impossible for me to conceive of a situation where we see a strong rightward shift of Latino voters in places like California, Illinois, Texas, Florida, and New York, but less of a shift in battleground states where they generally may have a bit more of a Democratic tilt. I’m very curious to see how Latino voters turn out in this election, and whether we see more ideological sorting (Latino moderates and conservatives shifting toward Republicans) and where they prove decisive.

Given how young this voting group is, I’m also curious to see if rates of voting participation increase — if we see nonvoters turn out at higher rates, like the Trump campaign has been counting on.

Kamala Harris campaigns at the Puerto Rican restaurant Freddy & Tony’s on October 27, 2024, in Philadelphia. Saul Loeb/AFP via Getty Images

Abdallah Fayyad, policy correspondent and author of Vox’s Within Our Means newsletter

Arab Americans make up hundreds of thousands of voters in key swing states, including Michigan and Pennsylvania, and they have tended to vote Democrat in recent cycles. I’m looking to see how Israel’s war in Gaza might sway voters. A couple of polls show Donald Trump having a slight edge over Kamala Harris. Although many of those voters fear the prospect of another Trump presidency, there’s also a sense that Democrats have to face electoral consequences for what the Biden administration has done to Gaza. One pollster told me that the “punish Democrats” vote might be smaller than we expect. But even so, he says, “those are a lot of votes Democrats will have left on the table.”

Ian Millhiser, senior correspondent

One of the biggest things that keeps me up at night is that the Supreme Court’s Republican majority, the same majority that recently ruled that Donald Trump was allowed to commit crimes while he was in office, will attempt to flip the election if Harris is the legitimate winner. Realistically, this outcome is only likely if the election is extraordinarily close. The Supreme Court chose the winner of the 2000 election, which came down to a nail-biter in Florida. It stayed its hand in 2020, an election in which Biden won by a large enough margin that the Court would have had to flip three states to deny him victory.

Nicole Narea, senior reporter, politics and society

That’s despite the fact that his portrayal of immigration isn’t grounded in reality. Border crossings have come down significantly throughout 2024. Still, Republicans could read the election results as either a vindication or a rebuke of Trump’s approach.

Donald Trump and Paul Perez, right, president of the National Border Patrol Council, speak at a campaign rally on October 25, 2024, in Austin, Texas. Sergio Flores/AFP via Getty Images

Angela Chen, senior editor, policy and ideas

I’m tracking a lot of important races, but I’m always interested in what’s going on in my home state of California, particularly when it comes to housing. This year, that means watching Prop 33, which would expand rent control, and Prop 5, which would lower voting thresholds so it’s easier for local governments to build affordable housing. Then there’s the purely symbolic Prop 3. This one would repeal Prop 8, an infamous anti-same-sex marriage measure that passed when I was just too young to vote against it.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
In less than 24 hours, the first polling places on the East Coast will open their doors to Election Day voters taking part in the 2024 presidential election. The final batch of surveys suggest that somewhere around half of the ballots tallied Tuesday night will be for former President Donald Trump. It’s also rather likely that it will be a slow, agonizing process to sort out whether he or Vice President Kamala Harris will sit in the Oval Office in January.

It isn’t the chance of delay that is the biggest contributor to the unease that millions of Americans have felt as Election Day approaches. It’s that there is any tension about the outcome at all. The 2024 election should not be anywhere near as close as it appears, not with Trump’s name on the ballot for the third straight election. It is disheartening, to say the least, that this should be where we find ourselves as a country once more, four years after Trump was expelled from the White House.

It is a state of play that would have seemed unfathomable in the immediate aftermath of Trump’s chaotic exit. I have not forgotten the slow, horrifying realization that Trump was not going to leave office willingly. I have watched as his various sins and transgressions have been laid bare before the public. And I have watched as he clawed his way back to the center of American politics again, poised to be an even greater threat than before.

Making the Trump resurgence even more dismaying have been the glimmers of hope interspersed throughout. Six months after the attack, the House Jan. 6 select committee began its work investigating Trump’s efforts to subvert democracy. Its public hearings in the summer and fall of 2022 described in stunning detail the scope of his and his allies’ efforts to keep him in office, leading up to the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol.

The case against Trump, laid out in prime time, could have been a moment where the country accepted that Trump was unfit to return to power. When the GOP underperformed in the midterms that year, despite Trump’s play as kingmaker, it could have been a sign he had lost his political edge. Instead, he defiantly announced his candidacy just days later. And nothing — including a slew of legal cases against him — has slowed him down as he steamrolled a field of potential replacements at the top of the ticket.

It feels naïve in hindsight to imagine that the four indictments handed up over the course of 2023 would deter his romp through the primary. In each, Trump sought to use the charges to his benefit, raising funds and painting himself as the victim. In all but one of these cases, Trump has managed to avoid — or at least postpone — justice. His delay tactics stalled out three of those cases, with assists from a pliant Supreme Court majority, a novice federal judge he appointed and the personal escapades of Georgia prosecutors. He was convicted on 34 counts in Manhattan earlier this year but still managed to put off sentencing until after the election. It is unquestionable that, should Trump win, he will use the presidency to cloak himself in the trappings of office to avoid serving any sentence in New York, he will end the Justice Department’s prosecutions against him, and he will extinguish any chance of standing trial in Georgia.

Undergirding all of this is the distressing fact that Trump shouldn’t have even been eligible to run in the first place. He would have been barred from running had he been found guilty at his second impeachment trial. And his role in the Jan. 6 assault on the Capitol should have triggered the 14th Amendment’s insurrection clause, disqualifying him from public office. In each case he was given a pass, first by Senate Republicans, then by a unanimous Supreme Court.

It didn’t have to be this way. Though it can be hard to remember now, there was an all-too-brief moment when it seemed like the tide had finally turned against Trumpism. Jan. 6 left the GOP genuinely rattled. But now, although Congress certified President Joe Biden’s win that evening and many of the rioters have faced criminal sentences, it can’t help but seem like the attackers won in the long run. Conservatism, especially as modeled in the MAGA movement, is an ideology of fear: fear of the unknown, fear of the other, fear of what will happen if the balance of power is tipped against those who have been on top for so long.

Undergirding all of this is the distressing fact that Trump shouldn’t have even been eligible to run in the first place.

Republican elected officials have been afraid of their own voters for decades, slinking toward the right in hopes of avoiding a primary from a more extreme candidate. In demonstrating their willingness to turn their capacity for violence against members of their own party, Trump’s supporters instilled a new fear in the officials who represent them: not just fear for their jobs but fear for their physical safety. With damned few exceptions, I have seen the Republican Party, cowed and cowering, rush to defend the indefensible as Trump regained his footing directly on the GOP’s throat.

It is a sign of Trump’s dominance that he hasn’t bothered to hide the ugliness of what he wants to do in a second term. While his campaign shrank publicly from its ties to the politically toxic Project 2025, it is not as though the plans and priorities Trump himself has voiced are any less dangerous. He has put forward plans to tank the economy with massive tariffs and tax cuts for the wealthy. He has promised to expel millions of people from their homes by force. He has made no qualms about his intent to use the full force of the presidency, even the military, to carry out a campaign of retribution against his political enemies.

If being an autocratic demagogue weren’t enough to repel voters, the buffoonery and vile racism on display from him and his surrogates should have been. The only thing that has changed since Trump first descended that escalator in 2015 is that we’ve come to discover how many of our fellow Americans find his grotesqueries as appealing as his promise of one-man rule. And now we are being forced to relive this same trauma yet again, for the third time in a decade.

We are still here living on the knife edge of history. Knowing that it takes only the lightest touch to send us careening down one path or the other is enough to make you feel like you’re going mad. The one comfort is that it’s almost over. Soon the stress of doubt will give way to the resolve of certainty — one way or another.
Whether they’re confident, terrified or “nauseously optimistic,” there’s one sentiment many Democrats agree on: The presidential race shouldn’t be this close. My colleague Hayes Brown lays out that case today, thoroughly documenting all the reasons why Donald Trump has no business being anywhere near the presidency.

But what is isn’t always what should be. It's unlikely that either candidate will be routed Tuesday. And only in breaking down why this election has been so competitive can we understand how we were led here by a broken system whose failures go far beyond Trump.

That Harris enters Election Day with roughly equal chances after just three months as the nominee is a minor miracle.

Let’s start, however, with the former president. We know Trump’s floor from his first two campaigns, when he received close to half the popular vote. He may have been consistently unpopular throughout his political career, but being the Republican nominee comes with a nigh unbreachable floor. Most Americans’ minds are made up about Trump and have been for close to a decade. As senior Kamala Harris adviser David Plouffe told New York Magazine, “I understand there’s some Democrats who say, ‘How could Donald Trump get 48, 48.5 percent of the vote?’ That’s the country we’re living in. That’s the electorate that we have.”

Consider also how the pandemic’s effects and the related inflation have hammered other governments around the world. From Canada’s Liberals to Britain’s Conservatives to France’s centrists to India’s nationalists, incumbent parties are reeling, regardless of ideology. MAGA’s international wing has not been spared: In Hungary, the Fidesz party of Trump ally Viktor Orban suffered its worst result ever in a European election.

By contrast, Harris remains competitive, Democrats expect to lose fewer Senate seats than they feared coming into this election, and they have a decent chance of retaking the House of Representatives. As in other countries, spiking inflation driven by pandemic-snarled supply chains and exploitative corporations left Americans reeling. And we still face fundamental economic problems. But during President Joe Biden’s administration, our economic recovery from the pandemic has far outpaced other countries’. Inflation has come down, unemployment remains near historic lows and, as The Economist magazine declared this month, the U.S. economy is “the envy of the world.” Democratic policies — and the backlash to the Supreme Court’s Dobbs ruling — have prevented political disaster.

Yet for all Biden’s successes, his decision to run again steepened the climb for Harris. Democrats can rightly grouse that Trump’s own mental stumbles haven’t received nearly as much attention. But the first presidential debate dealt a fatal blow to Biden’s re-election hopes. That Harris enters Election Day with roughly equal chances after just three months as the nominee is a minor miracle — and damning of Trump’s campaign.

The words “equal chances,” though, bring us to the systemic failures that are much larger than Trump. Because if this election were decided by the popular vote, we would not be talking about “equal chances.” Harris would instead enter Election Day at least as the narrow favorite. But thanks to the Electoral College, Democrats can lose the presidential race while winning the popular vote for the third time in the last seven elections.

Until recently, this form of minority rule was the exception in American politics. Today, it is very nearly the rule. Trump won in 2016 despite receiving 3 million fewer votes. He nearly won again in 2020 despite receiving 7 million fewer votes.

Minority rule would not be enough for Trump without another systemic failure

In Congress, the system favors the GOP’s minority rule in other ways. The Brennan Center estimates that Republicans’ aggressive gerrymandering has given them a 16-seat advantage in the House. The Senate’s small-state bias is more extreme and more partisan than ever: From 2014 to 2022, Republicans held at least half of the chamber’s seats without ever representing a majority of the population. Four of the Supreme Court’s six conservative justices — the majority that overturned Roe v. Wade and speciously granted the president (but mainly Trump) sweeping immunity — were confirmed by senators who represent a minority of the population.

But minority rule would not be enough for Trump without another systemic failure: decades of widening inequality that has allowed the wealthiest to consolidate power. This failure long predates Trump. Since the 1970s, an alliance of right-wing politicians and conservative tycoons has steadily expanded each other’s political power. The results have been a windfall for the wealthiest: In 2018, for the first time in U.S. history, billionaires paid a lower tax rate than working-class Americans.

Thanks to Supreme Court decisions like Citizens United, the plutocrats’ influence over our political system is greater than ever. In this cycle alone, 150 billionaire families have given nearly $2 billion to presidential and congressional candidates, and over 70% of that has gone to Republicans. The top seven donors and their families, including Timothy Mellon, Elon Musk and Miriam Adelson, have donated $818 million almost entirely to help Trump. Without this support, Trump’s cash-strapped campaign would be nearly dead in the water. Mellon, Musk and Adelson have, by themselves, donated nearly as much money as Harris and Biden raised from millions of small donors across the entire campaign.

And there is much at stake for the uber-rich to defend, for they have spent decades hoarding it. Unless your net worth can be expressed in the hundreds of millions, it is exceedingly likely that for much of your life, people who are wealthier than you have leeched off your work. Year after year, American workers have increased their productivity, only to see their salaries languish while executive salaries and shareholder returns skyrocket.

Into this gap have marched reactionary forces, often funded or supported by those plutocrats, either openly or in secret. Through cable networks and social media, they encourage racism, sexism and other forms of hate as scapegoats. They whip up imaginary threats of invading immigrants and predatory drag queens — anything to point people away from the yawning inequalities that leave so many Americans behind. No wonder these billionaires spend so much to preserve this broken system, where they live large and leave little for the rest of us.

“We can have democracy in this country, or we can have great wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can’t have both.” Whether Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis actually uttered those words often attributed to him is unknown. But however apocryphal, they remain as true today as in the Gilded Age when he made his name. Trump has exploited a political system hollowed out in the name of hoarding wealth. So long as America remains so unequal, it will be at the mercy of men and women like him.
Poll: In tight race, voters split on whether Harris intends to carry out her promises

toggle caption Evan Vucci/AP

Respondents in a new NPR/PBS News/Marist poll aren't convinced Vice President Harris, as president, would carry out the proposals she's put forward during this campaign, in a sign of what may be preventing her from closing the deal with voters.

Voters were evenly split, 49% to 49%, on whether they thought Harris intends to carry out the proposals, or if her promises are just politics, intended to make people vote for her.

Still, Harris narrowly leads former President Donald Trump among likely voters, fueled by white, college-educated voters, Black voters and Latinos. But she continues to lag with younger voters compared to how Democrats have historically performed with the group, with just a day to go until the final votes are cast in the 2024 presidential election.

Sponsor Message

She may also be holding up well because the poll found the narrowest gap between Trump and Harris on who likely voters said would be best to handle the economy, with 50% saying Trump and 49% saying Harris. Trump had previously led on beliefs about his handling of the economy.

But Harris hasn't quite been able to seize the change mantle as part of the Biden administration, as voters were split on who most represents change: 50% said Trump, 48% chose Harris.

The survey of 1,560 adults was conducted Oct. 31 through Sunday. It includes 1,446 registered voters and 1,297 likely voters. With registered voters, the survey has a 3.3 percentage point margin of error. With likely voters, it's a 3.5 point margin of error, meaning results could be 3.5 points higher or lower.



Most early voters voted for Harris

A majority of respondents said they have already voted — and most early voters selected Harris. A majority of those who said they have not yet voted, but intend to, said they would cast their ballots for Trump.

Loading...

Voters also said they are motivated by protecting democracy, inflation, abortion rights and immigration.

While most said their candidate should accept the results of the election, nearly 4 in 10 Republicans said Trump should challenge them if he's determined to be the loser — and more than 7 in 10 said they are concerned about violence after the election.



Trump is seen as more likely to carry out promises

When it comes to Trump, 55% said they think he will follow through and enact his policies — as controversial as they are in many cases.

Loading...

The split on this question of which candidate will carry out their policies mirrors the gender divide in this election. A majority of women said they believe Harris is sincere in what she's proposing, while a majority of men said the proposals are more about politics.

One of the hurdles Harris has had to overcome in this campaign is her promises from her 2019 presidential bid, when she tried — and failed — to appeal to progressives to win the Democratic nomination. She has been running a much more moderate campaign this time.



Neither Harris nor Trump has a clear advantage in this election

Harris has a 51% to 47% lead among likely voters, up 2 points from a month ago, but within the survey's margin of error.

Among registered voters, it's a dead heat — 49% to 49%. That means these final hours of voter mobilization are critical and likely to be intense.

The Harris campaign said that over the weekend, some 90,000 volunteers knocked on 3 million doors, for example. Trump has ramped up his events, with four rallies planned across three states on Monday.

Harris does best in the survey with white women with college degrees, people who live in big cities, Black voters and Latinos. She is winning baby boomers — or those between 60 and 78 years old — as well as Gen Z, but she's only winning 56% of Gen Z. In the last 20 years, Democrats have won when they have gotten at least 60% of voters 18 to 29.

This survey was Harris' best result with Black voters since she got into the race — 83% said they are voting for her. She also does better than she or President Biden had been doing with Latinos earlier in the year, with 61% now saying they are going to cast a vote for Harris. That is marginally lower, however, than past Democratic performances with Hispanic voters.

Harris makes up for her deficiencies with younger voters and Latinos with white voters. She's winning 45% of white voters, equal to last month. Democrats generally have to get above 40% with white voters to win.

Trump, meanwhile, continues to do best with those who identify as white evangelical voters, those who live in rural areas and those without college degrees, particularly men.



The gender gap persists

Overall, there is a 15-point gap between men and women in their support for Harris or Trump. Harris leads with women by 11 percentage points; Trump leads by 4 points with men. That's actually smaller than last month's whopping 34-point divide.

Sponsor Message

The gender divide becomes particularly pronounced by education. On the question of whether Harris actually intends to enact her promises or if they're just political, 53% of women said she intends to follow through, while 54% of men said the opposite.

But there's a 72-point gap between white women with degrees and men without them. By a 67% to 32% margin, white women with degrees said they believe Harris intends to carry out what she's promising — a 35-point difference.

When it comes to men without degrees, by a 67% to 30% margin, they said her promises are just politics intended to get people to vote for her.

Harris has been targeting Republican women, campaigning, for example, with Rep. Liz Cheney, a conservative former congresswoman from Wyoming and daughter of former Republican Vice President Dick Cheney.

But that push may be as much about women who identify as independents and lean Republican. In the survey, just 6% of Republican women said they are casting their ballot for Harris. A similar 4% of Democrats said they're voting for Trump.

But Harris leads with independent women, 48% to 46%.



Preserving democracy and inflation are top of mind for voters

More than 3 in 10 voters said preserving democracy is what they're most thinking about, when asked what they're thinking about when casting their ballot. That was followed by inflation, immigration and abortion issues.

Of course, there's a divide by party and who people say they are voting for.

Loading...

Preserving democracy is most important, for example, for Harris voters, but it's also top of mind for independents. Half of Harris voters and 3 in 10 independents cited it as their top issue. So maybe it's no surprise that this is what Harris has been focused on in her closing arguments.

Trump voters, on the other hand, said inflation and immigration are most important for them. Independents said inflation and immigration were second and third most important after preserving democracy.

Notably, when voters were asked what their second choice would be, abortion rights is second behind inflation as the second-most important issue. That was especially true for Democrats, showing just how salient and motivating the issue is for them.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

The Biden administration in September finalized new rules for disability benefits, reducing penalties for people who receive federal food aid or informal assistance from friends or family.

Juana Torres, a 36-year-old single mother in Philadelphia, expects to receive $140 more per month in Supplemental Security Income as a result of the policy shift.

Advertisement

“I have four children at home, along with special needs,” Torres told HuffPost. “I think it’s very good that they made this change.”

The extra cash for Torres offers a small illustration of the stakes of Tuesday’s presidential election for SSI and a range of safety net programs that are never discussed on the campaign trail. When he was president, Donald Trump tightened rules for food and disability benefits, while President Joe Biden reversed most of those changes and made programs more generous.

“By simplifying and expanding our policies, we are making SSI smarter, removing barriers to accessing payments, and reducing the burden on the public and agency staff,” Social Security Administration commissioner Martin O’Malley said when he announced the most recent change.

Congress has ignored SSI for decades, so the near-term future of the program’s rules depends on whether Trump or Vice President Kamala Harris takes control of the White House. The president appoints the commissioners of the SSA, which oversees SSI as well as Social Security Disability Insurance, in addition to the better-known retirement insurance program.

Advertisement

More than 7 million Americans with disabilities receive SSI, with payments averaging less than $700 per beneficiary. The government reduces benefits and can withdraw beneficiaries if they earn more than $2,000 per month or pile up more than $2,000 in savings — rules that Democrats and Republicans alike say force SSI recipients to remain in near poverty.

Until Sept. 30, program beneficiaries had to tell the government if anyone helped them out with food, such as by providing meals or groceries, with such assistance typically resulting in a one-third reduction of benefits. Another change that took effect the same day exempts households from having to disclose such in-kind support if household members are receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits. All told, the changes will benefit hundreds of thousands of households.

Republicans are furious about the administrative reforms, with GOP lawmakers on the House Ways and Means Committee pointing to the $37 billion estimated cost and calling it a “parade of regulatory overreach that circumvents Congress and costs taxpayers billions just months before the 2024 election.”

Biden also oversaw an administrative expansion of SNAP benefits that infuriated Republicans. Because they weren’t done by Congress, Trump could likely undo the changes in both programs without Congress if reelected.

Torres found out she was eligible for a higher monthly SSI benefit, which she receives on behalf of a daughter with special needs, after her monthly payments were reduced as a result of child support payments she began receiving this year. She sought help from Community Legal Services, a Philadelphia nonprofit that assists low-income families, and found out that because she gets SNAP benefits, her SSI payments would no longer be reduced because of her income from working as an Instacart shopper. An attorney with CLS said Torres’ benefit will increase by $140 to $783 starting in December.

Advertisement

In a statement, the SSA said that eligible SSI recipients would automatically benefit from the policy change without having to contact the government.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

TAIPEI, Taiwan — For years, Taiwan has enjoyed solid bipartisan support in Washington — a consensus that has only strengthened as China has increasingly threatened the self-governing island, which it claims as its own territory and has promised to “reunify” with the mainland.

In recent months, however, Donald Trump’s rhetoric has left some experts questioning whether Taiwan could continue to rely on the U.S. if the former president is reelected to the White House, given his wariness of American commitments to foreign partners and his enthusiasm for strongmen like Chinese President Xi Jinping.

Advertisement

Taiwanese officials HuffPost heard from during a weeklong press delegation last week largely struck a diplomatic tone when asked about the upcoming U.S. election.

Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister François Chihchung Wu said Taiwan will be closely monitoring the election on Tuesday and expressed measured anxiety about what the outcome will mean for future relations between the two democratic countries.

“Of course, we are very concerned by the presidential election of the U.S., because the U.S. is our most important ally,” he told the group of visiting international reporters, responding to a question from Brad Dress as The Hill.

Wu added that Taiwan’s concern boils down to “uncertainty” and said the island remains hopeful that whoever is elected on Nov. 5 will continue supporting its capital, Taipei.

Advertisement

Polls show Vice President Kamala Harris and Trump in a neck-and-neck race for the Oval Office. The vote comes as observers worry a flashpoint is nearing for bubbling tensions between communist-led China and Taiwan, officially known as the Republic of China.

Since establishing relations with China in 1979, America has maintained a “one China” policy that recognizes the Beijing government as the sole representative of China and acknowledges but does not endorse its claim to Taiwan.

In this screen grab from video released by the Taiwan coast guard, a member of the Taiwan coast guard monitors a China coast guard boat as it passes near the coast of Matsu islands, Taiwan, on Monday, Oct. 14, 2024. via Associated Press

Yet even as Washington has not sought formal independence for Taiwan, instead, it has been an unofficial ally and the island’s largest weapons supplier. In 2022, Biden vowed to defend Taiwan if China tried to invade. And last week, the U.S. approved the sale of nearly $2 billion worth of arms to Taiwan, including advanced surface-to-air missile defense systems.

Taiwan has been “very happy for the support of the Biden administration,” Wu said.

“[Biden] was very successful to cross a red line imposed by China,” he continued. “In the past, China always said that if China found any foreign military in Taiwan, it would be considered a declaration of war, but now we have the U.S. Army [Special Forces stationed] in Taiwan. We also send our soldiers to be trained in the U.S. China can just be angry. The only thing China can show is to be angry.”

Advertisement

Meanwhile, Trump has repeatedly praised Xi, calling him a “brilliant guy” who “controls 1.4 billion people with an iron fist.” In recent interviews, Trump has falsely accused Taiwan of stealing the semiconductor industry from the U.S., threatened to impose tariffs on its chips, and argued Taiwan “should pay us for defense.”

Echoing the approach of other worried American partners who have faced criticism from Trump and seen him praise their rivals, like European leaders, Wu avoided direct criticism of the Republican presidential nominee while trying to position support for his country as in line with Trump’s thinking.

“For Mr. Trump, he always said that he wants to make America great again,” the Taiwanese leader said. “From my observation, if Trump abandoned Taiwan, I wonder how he can make America great again, because he would lose the support and credibility of the U.S. in the total Asia-Pacific.”

Wu did swing back at Trump’s comment about Taiwan needing to pay for U.S. protection, noting the island already pays for its own defense. If the U.S. or any other country wants to sell Taiwan more advanced weapons, it would be happy to pay for them, he said.

Taiwan's President Lai Ching-te delivers a speech during a ceremony commemorating the 66th anniversary of China's deadly attack on Kinmen island, Taiwan, Friday, Aug. 23, 2024. via Associated Press

Advertisement

Senior Taiwanese officials reiterated their country’s longstanding narrative that the U.S. is essential to the region — a line of thinking that could appeal to both Harris-style proponents of American alliances and Trump supporters who worry Beijing will reduce American influence in the area.

“I personally think that the reason why the Taiwan Strait has been peaceful for many, many years, one of the reasons, is because of deterrence from the U.S.,” Mainland Affairs Council Deputy Minister Liang Wen-chieh told visiting reporters. “As mainland Chinese power has been growing in terms of military and economics, whether or not this kind of deterrence will continue to be effective will have to depend on the determination and the strength of Taiwanese people and, of course, the determination and the power of the U.S.”

Liang added that Xi is watching the U.S. closely, and it is “key” that the U.S. leader is not viewed in Beijing as “someone who will back down.”

Pressed about how he views Trump in that context, Liang said he has his own opinions but declined to elaborate.

Trump renewed his call for Taiwan to pay for U.S. protection — once again casting American ties to foreign countries not as a matter of shared interests and values but as a protection racket and so far less reliable — last week on the ”Joe Rogan Experience” podcast. When asked about Trump’s comments, a Chinese official implied that Trump could abandon Taiwan if reelected as president. The Taiwanese people know that “the United States will always pursue ‘America first’ and that Taiwan could go from being a pawn to an outcast at any time,” Zhu Fenglian, a spokesperson for China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, told state media, according to Newsweek.

Advertisement

Alongside its ongoing efforts to deter military escalation by China in the region, the U.S. has spent tens of billions of dollars in recent years supporting Ukraine in its war of survival against Russia and Israel in wars against militias in the Palestinian territory of Gaza and Lebanon.

Asked if Taiwan is concerned increased U.S. military aid to Ukraine and Israel could mean there is eventually less U.S. support available for the island, Wu argued maintaining peace in the Indo-Pacific remains a top priority for Washington.



“We feel that the U.S. is putting more and more resources in the Indo-Pacific,” he told HuffPost. “They need to pay high attention to the rise of China.”

Whatever occurs stateside, Taiwanese officials emphasized they are relying on their own policies as they continue to hope a Chinese invasion can be avoided and a diplomatic Taipei-Beijing solution achieved.

“Our position is that we have to show our determination,” said Catherine Hsu, director general of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Department of International Information Services. “We need to be able to defend ourselves before we can ask for any support from outside. That is the reason why we have been further strengthening our national defense.”

Advertisement

While China’s Xi has repeatedly vowed to unite China with Taiwan by military force if necessary, Hsu stressed that Taiwan does not see war as imminent or unavoidable.

“Our goal is not to have that situation happen,” she said. “The strategy is that we work with those democracies that share the common concern to prevent the war from happening.”
Harris and Trump race to the finish line with one last burst of rallies

Hide caption Vice President Harris speaks during a campaign rally at the "Rocky Steps" in Philadelphia. Previous Next Angela Weiss/AFP via Getty Images

Hide caption Former President Donald Trump speaks during a campaign rally at Van Andel Arena in Grand Rapids, Michigan early on Tuesday. Previous Next Kamil Krzaczynski/AFP via Getty Images

Hide caption Vice President Harris arrives for a campaign rally at the Carrie Furnace in Pittsburgh. Previous Next Jeff Swensen/Getty Images

Hide caption Former President Donald Trump dances on stage after speaking at a campaign rally at PPG Paints Arena in Pittsburgh. Previous Next Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images

Hide caption Supporters cheer as former President Donald Trump holds a campaign rally in Pittsburgh. Previous Next Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Hide caption Attendees holding the flag of Puerto Rico cheer as Allentown, Pa. Mayor Matt Tuerk speaks during a campaign rally for Vice President Harris in Memorial Hall at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa. Previous Next Susan Walsh/AP

Hide caption Former President Donald Trump holds a campaign rally at the Santander Arena in Reading, Pa. Previous Next Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Hide caption Vice President Harris holds a campaign rally in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Previous Next Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

Hide caption Vice President Harris, speaks with local residents as she campaigns in Reading, Pennsylvania. Previous Next Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

Hide caption Former President Donald Trump speaks alongside co-chair of the Republican National Committee Lara Trump (left); Tiffany Trump's spouse Michael Boulos; Trumps daughter Tiffany Trump (third from the right); Eric Trump (second from right) and Donald Trump Donald Trump Jr. (right) during a campaign rally in Pittsburgh. Previous Next Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images 1 of 10 i View slideshow

Now it’s up to the voters. After months of campaigning, more than a billion dollars in ad spending and one last mad dash by Vice President Harris and Former President Donald Trump on Monday, the 2024 presidential campaign has come to a close.

On the final day of campaigning, neither Trump nor Harris held a clear advantage. In a new NPR/PBS News/Marist poll, the race was a dead heat — 49% to 49% — among registered voters. Among likely voters, Harris led 51% to 47%, an advantage still within the margin of error.

With all but a sliver of voters still up for grabs, Harris and Trump spent the day holding dueling rallies in the pivotal swing state of Pennsylvania, whose 19 electoral votes could prove decisive.

Harris, who has called herself the "underdog" of the 2024 race, held four rallies in Pennsylvania, ending with a concert at the "Rocky Steps" of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, made famous in the ultimate underdog movie.

"It's good to be back in the City of Brotherly Love, where the foundation of our democracy was forged and here at these famous steps, a tribute to those who start as the underdog and climb to victory," Harris said.

It was a star-studded event, with a crowd of 30,000 people, according to the campaign. Lady Gaga performed "God Bless America," and as she sang, Harris' sister and family members, along with the vice president's closest aides, gathered near the stage to watch. Oprah Winfrey introduced Harris to the stage.

Sponsor Message

The candidates' closing arguments illustrated the stark choice facing voters. Harris avoided mentioning her opponent by name in Philadelphia, delivering a message of unity and pledging to "be a president for all Americans."

Trump, his voice noticeably hoarse, spent his last day on the trail painting a portrait of a nation in decline, overwhelmed by migrant crime and a failing economy.

"Over the last four years, Americans have suffered one catastrophic failure, betrayal and humiliation after another," Trump said at his closing rally in Grand Rapids, Michigan. For his campaign's final rally, Trump returned to the city where he closed out his 2016 win — and went back to in 2020, noting he was "a little superstitious."

“This is it," Trump said after taking the stage shortly after midnight to an extended ovation. "This is the last one we’re going to have.”

toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Steel Town showdown

In Pittsburgh, where the candidates held competing rallies earlier in the day, Trump's remarks followed a familiar arc of his closing rallies, as he leapt from topic to topic during a meandering address that lasted for nearly two hours.

He criticized an appearance by Beyoncé at a Harris rally in Houston last month, hailed Green Party candidate Jill Stein as "one of my favorite politicians," celebrated an endorsement from Joe Rogan and baselessly accused Democrats of cheating in the election.

Sponsor Message

Harris’ event was at the Carrie Blast Furnaces, a hulking historical landmark recognizing the city’s steel industry, a former Democratic bastion where Republicans have made major inroads, during the campaign.

Harris gave a pared-down version of her stump speech before Katy Perry performed. The rally was connected in a livestream with other get-out-the-vote events in swing states like Wisconsin and Michigan — where Gov. Tim Walz spoke.

The Harris campaign says 75% of Pennsylvanians vote on Election Day, which is why she was spending her last day on the trail in the commonwealth.



Trump kicked things off in North Carolina

Before arriving in Pennsylvania, Trump started his day in Raleigh with a rally at Dorton Arena — a venue that was also one of his stops on the final day of the 2016 campaign.

Starting 50 minutes late, Trump's address combined his usual mix of harsh rhetoric around immigration, attacks on his enemies and bravado about his chances of winning the election.

He said on his first day in office he would tell Mexico’s President Claudia Sheinbaum that he would enact steep tariffs on all imported goods if her country did not stop the flow of migrants and drugs across the border into the U.S. He called Harris a “low IQ individual” and claimed he was winning all seven swing states.

“I hate the expression, actually, but it's ours to lose,” he said. “Does that make sense to you? It's ours to lose.”

Trump won North Carolina twice. But in the final days of his campaign, he's spent more time there than in Pennsylvania, another state important to his path to victory, amid a highly competitive race with Harris.

toggle caption Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

Harris started in Scranton, Pa. — the hometown of Joe Biden

Harris kicked off day in Scranton, where she gave a pep talk to canvassers.

The vice president didn't refer to Trump by name in her remarks, but called him "the other guy." Standing in front of a homemade sign, she recounted how she used to campaign with an ironing board, setting it up in grocery stores and handing out flyers.

"An ironing board makes a really great standing desk," she said. "That is how I love to campaign. I don't do it as much anymore."

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

They were both in Pennsylvania's 'Latino corridor'

Both candidates have been fighting to win over Latino voters in Pennsylvania this year. There are about 580,000 Latino voters living in the state , most of them with Puerto Rican ties.

Democrats found a new opening with after a comedian called Puerto Rico a "floating island of garbage" during Trump's Madison Square Garden rally, touching off outrage in the Latino community.

Trump rallied in Reading, a city that is more than two-thirds Latino — many of whom have Puerto Rican heritage. The former president has been trying to win Latino voters all year — a group that has historically leaned Democratic.

At a roughly half full Santander Arena, Trump promised to conduct mass deportations and lower gas prices. He criticized Harris for her weekend cameo on Saturday Night Live, and at one point suggested she should get into a boxing ring with Mike Tyson.

Sponsor Message

It was not until his stop in Pittsburgh later Monday where he spoke specifically about Puerto Rico. "I love Puerto Rico," Trump said, before inviting the son of legendary Puerto Rican baseball star Roberto Clemente to address the crowd.

Harris stopped in Allentown, an hour's drive up the Hwy. 222 corridor, where she said she was proud of her longstanding record on Puerto Rico.

She also reminded voters in the crowd that the race isn’t over yet, and asked them to share with others why they decided to show up at the rally.

"We got a lot of work to do and we have got to finish strong," Harris said.
Moldova’s pro-Western president wins vote overshadowed by Russian meddling claims

toggle caption Vadim Ghirda/AP

CHISINAU, Moldova — Moldova’s pro-Western President Maia Sandu has won a second term in a pivotal presidential runoff against a Russia-friendly opponent, in a race that was overshadowed by claims of Russian interference, voter fraud, and intimidation in the European Union candidate country.

With nearly 99% of votes counted in the second round of the presidential election held Sunday, Sandu had 55% of the vote, according to the Central Electoral Commission, or CEC, compared to 45% for Alexandr Stoianoglo, a former prosecutor general who was backed by the pro-Russia Party of Socialists.

The result will be a major relief for the pro-Western government, which strongly backed Sandu’s candidacy, and her push for closer Western ties on Moldova’s path toward the EU.

Sponsor Message

“Moldova, you are victorious! Today, dear Moldovans, you have given a lesson in democracy, worthy of being written in history books. Today, you have saved Moldova!” Sandu said after claiming victory after midnight.

She went on to claim that her country's vote had faced an “unprecedented attack" through alleged schemes including dirty money, vote-buying, and electoral interference “by hostile forces from outside the country" and criminal groups.

“You have shown that nothing can stand in the way of the people’s power when they choose to speak through their vote," she added.

Speaking before the final vote count, Stoianoglo told the media that “everyone’s voice deserves respect” and that he hopes “from now on, we will put an end to the hatred and division imposed on us.” It isn't clear if he has publicly commented on his electoral defeat.

When polls closed locally at 9 p.m. (1900 GMT), turnout stood at more than 1.68 million people — about 54% of eligible voters, according to the CEC. Moldova’s large diaspora, which cast ballots in record numbers of more than 325,000 voted, heavily in favor of Sandu in the runoff.

In the first round held Oct. 20, Sandu obtained 42% of the ballot but failed to win an outright majority over the second place Stoianoglo. The presidential role carries significant powers in areas such as foreign policy and national security and has a four-year term.

Sponsor Message

European Union Commission President Ursula von der Leyen congratulated Sandu on her victory, by writing on X: “It takes a rare kind of strength to overcome the challenges you’ve faced in this election."

Allegations of vote-buying and Russian interferenceMoldova's diaspora played a key role in the presidential vote and in a nationwide referendum held on Oct. 20, when a narrow majority of 50.35% voted to secure Moldova's path toward EU membership. But the results of the ballots including Sunday's vote were overshadowed by allegations of a major vote-buying scheme and voter intimidation.

Instead of winning the overwhelming support that Sandu had hoped, the results in both races exposed Moldova’s judiciary as unable to adequately protect the democratic process.

On Sunday, Moldovan police said they had “reasonable evidence” of organized transportation of voters — illegal under the country's electoral code — to polling stations from within the country and from overseas, and are “investigating and registering evidence in connection with air transport activities from Russia to Belarus, Azerbaijan and Turkey.”

“Such measures are taken to protect the integrity of the electoral process and to ensure that every citizen’s vote is cast freely without undue pressure or influence,” police said.

Moldova’s foreign ministry said on Sunday afternoon that polling stations in Frankfurt, Germany, and Liverpool and Northampton in the U.K. had been targeted by false bomb threats, which “intended only to stop the voting process.”

Stanislav Secrieru, the president’s national security adviser, wrote on X: “We are seeing massive interference by Russia in our electoral process,” which he warned had a “high potential to distort the outcome” of the vote.

Secrieru later added that the national voter record systems were being targeted by “ongoing coordinated cyberattacks” to disrupt links between domestic polling stations and those abroad, and that cybersecurity teams were “working to counter these threats and ensure system continuity."

Sponsor Message

Moldova’s Prime Minister Dorin Recean said that people throughout the country had received “anonymous death threats via phone calls” in what he called “an extreme attack” to scare voters in the former Soviet republic, which has a population of about 2.5 million people.

After casting her ballot in Chisinau, Sandu told reporters: “Thieves want to buy our vote, thieves want to buy our country, but the power of the people is infinitely greater.”

Outside a polling station in Romania’s capital, Bucharest, 20-year-old medical student Silviana Zestrea said the runoff would be a “definitive step” toward Moldova’s future.

“People need to understand that we have to choose a true candidate that will fulfill our expectations,” she said. “Because I think even if we are a diaspora now, none of us actually wanted to leave.”

Moldovan police expose a scheme allegedly plotted by a convicted oligarchIn the wake of the two October votes, Moldovan law enforcement said that a vote-buying scheme was orchestrated by Ilan Shor, an exiled oligarch who lives in Russia and was convicted in absentia last year of fraud and money laundering. Shor denies any wrongdoing.

Prosecutors say $39 million was paid to more than 130,000 recipients through an internationally sanctioned Russian bank to voters between September and October. Anti-corruption authorities have conducted hundreds of searches and seized over $2.7 million (2.5 million euros) in cash as they attempt to crack down.

In one case in Gagauzia, an autonomous part of Moldova where only 5% voted in favor of the EU, a physician was detained after allegedly coercing 25 residents of a home for older adults to vote for a candidate they did not choose. Police said they obtained “conclusive evidence,” including financial transfers from the same Russian bank.

On Saturday, at a church in Comrat, the capital of Gagauzia, Father Vasilii told The Associated Press that he had urged people to go and vote because it's a “civic obligation” and that they do not name any candidates.

Sponsor Message

“We use the goods the country offers us — light, gas,” he said. “Whether we like what the government does or not, we must go and vote. ... The church always prays for peace.”

On Thursday, prosecutors raided a political party headquarters and said 12 people were suspected of paying voters to select a candidate in the presidential race. A criminal case was also opened in which 40 state agency employees were suspected of taking electoral bribes.

Moldova's EU future at stakeCristian Cantir, a Moldovan associate professor of international relations at Oakland University, told AP that whatever the outcome of the second round, it “will not deflate” geopolitical tensions. “On the contrary, I expect geopolitical polarization to be amplified by the campaign for the 2025 legislative elections.”

Moldovan law enforcement needs more resources and better-trained staff working at a faster pace to tackle voter fraud, he added, to “create an environment in which anyone tempted to either buy or sell votes knows there will be clear and fast consequences."

Savlina Adasan, a 21-year-old economics student in Bucharest, said she voted for Sandu and cited concerns about corruption and voters uninformed about the two candidates.

“We want a European future for our country,” she said, adding that it offers “many opportunities, development for our country … and I feel like if the other candidate wins, then it means that we are going 10 steps back as a country.”

A pro-Western government has been in power in Moldova since 2021, and a parliamentary election will be held in 2025. Moldova watchers warn that next year’s vote could be Moscow’s main target.

In the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Moldova applied to join the EU. It was granted candidate status in June of that year, and in summer 2024, Brussels agreed to start membership negotiations. The sharp westward shift irked Moscow and significantly soured relations with Chisinau.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

CHISINAU, Moldova (AP) — Moldova’s pro-Western President Maia Sandu has won a second term in a pivotal presidential runoff against a Russia-friendly opponent, in a race that was overshadowed by claims of Russian interference, voter fraud, and intimidation in the European Union candidate country.

With nearly 99% of votes counted in the second round of the presidential election held Sunday, Sandu had 55% of the vote, according to the Central Electoral Commission, or CEC, compared to 45% for Alexandr Stoianoglo, a former prosecutor general who was backed by the pro-Russia Party of Socialists.

Advertisement

The result will be a major relief for the pro-Western government, which strongly backed Sandu’s candidacy, and her push for closer Western ties on Moldova’s path toward the EU.

“Moldova, you are victorious! Today, dear Moldovans, you have given a lesson in democracy, worthy of being written in history books. Today, you have saved Moldova!” Sandu said after claiming victory after midnight.

She went on to claim that her country’s vote had faced an “unprecedented attack” through alleged schemes including dirty money, vote-buying, and electoral interference “by hostile forces from outside the country” and criminal groups.

“You have shown that nothing can stand in the way of the people’s power when they choose to speak through their vote,” she added.

Advertisement

Speaking before the final vote count, Stoianoglo told the media that “everyone’s voice deserves respect” and that he hopes “from now on, we will put an end to the hatred and division imposed on us.” It isn’t clear if he has publicly commented on his electoral defeat.

When polls closed locally at 9 p.m. (1900 GMT), turnout stood at more than 1.68 million people — about 54% of eligible voters, according to the CEC. Moldova’s large diaspora, which cast ballots in record numbers of more than 325,000 voted, heavily in favor of Sandu in the runoff.

In the first round held Oct. 20, Sandu obtained 42% of the ballot but failed to win an outright majority over the second place Stoianoglo. The presidential role carries significant powers in areas such as foreign policy and national security and has a four-year term.

European Union Commission President Ursula von der Leyen congratulated Sandu on her victory, by writing on X: “It takes a rare kind of strength to overcome the challenges you’ve faced in this election.”

Allegations of vote-buying and Russian interference

Moldova’s diaspora played a key role in the presidential vote and in a nationwide referendum held on Oct. 20, when a narrow majority of 50.35% voted to secure Moldova’s path toward EU membership. But the results of the ballots including Sunday’s vote were overshadowed by allegations of a major vote-buying scheme and voter intimidation.

Advertisement

Instead of winning the overwhelming support that Sandu had hoped, the results in both races exposed Moldova’s judiciary as unable to adequately protect the democratic process.

On Sunday, Moldovan police said they had “reasonable evidence” of organized transportation of voters — illegal under the country’s electoral code — to polling stations from within the country and from overseas, and are “investigating and registering evidence in connection with air transport activities from Russia to Belarus, Azerbaijan and Turkey.”

“Such measures are taken to protect the integrity of the electoral process and to ensure that every citizen’s vote is cast freely without undue pressure or influence,” police said.

Moldova’s foreign ministry said on Sunday afternoon that polling stations in Frankfurt, Germany, and Liverpool and Northampton in the U.K. had been targeted by false bomb threats, which “intended only to stop the voting process.”

Stanislav Secrieru, the president’s national security adviser, wrote on X: “We are seeing massive interference by Russia in our electoral process,” which he warned had a “high potential to distort the outcome” of the vote.

Advertisement

Secrieru later added that the national voter record systems were being targeted by “ongoing coordinated cyberattacks” to disrupt links between domestic polling stations and those abroad, and that cybersecurity teams were “working to counter these threats and ensure system continuity.”

Moldova’s Prime Minister Dorin Recean said that people throughout the country had received “anonymous death threats via phone calls” in what he called “an extreme attack” to scare voters in the former Soviet republic, which has a population of about 2.5 million people.

After casting her ballot in Chisinau, Sandu told reporters: “Thieves want to buy our vote, thieves want to buy our country, but the power of the people is infinitely greater.”

Outside a polling station in Romania’s capital, Bucharest, 20-year-old medical student Silviana Zestrea said the runoff would be a “definitive step” toward Moldova’s future.

“People need to understand that we have to choose a true candidate that will fulfill our expectations,” she said. “Because I think even if we are a diaspora now, none of us actually wanted to leave.”

Advertisement

Moldovan police expose a scheme allegedly plotted by a convicted oligarch

In the wake of the two October votes, Moldovan law enforcement said that a vote-buying scheme was orchestrated by Ilan Shor, an exiled oligarch who lives in Russia and was convicted in absentia last year of fraud and money laundering. Shor denies any wrongdoing.

Prosecutors say $39 million was paid to more than 130,000 recipients through an internationally sanctioned Russian bank to voters between September and October. Anti-corruption authorities have conducted hundreds of searches and seized over $2.7 million (2.5 million euros) in cash as they attempt to crack down.

In one case in Gagauzia, an autonomous part of Moldova where only 5% voted in favor of the EU, a physician was detained after allegedly coercing 25 residents of a home for older adults to vote for a candidate they did not choose. Police said they obtained “conclusive evidence,” including financial transfers from the same Russian bank.

On Saturday, at a church in Comrat, the capital of Gagauzia, Father Vasilii told The Associated Press that he had urged people to go and vote because it’s a “civic obligation” and that they do not name any candidates.

“We use the goods the country offers us — light, gas,” he said. “Whether we like what the government does or not, we must go and vote. ... The church always prays for peace.”

Advertisement

On Thursday, prosecutors raided a political party headquarters and said 12 people were suspected of paying voters to select a candidate in the presidential race. A criminal case was also opened in which 40 state agency employees were suspected of taking electoral bribes.

Moldova’s EU future at stake

Cristian Cantir, a Moldovan associate professor of international relations at Oakland University, told AP that whatever the outcome of the second round, it “will not deflate” geopolitical tensions. “On the contrary, I expect geopolitical polarization to be amplified by the campaign for the 2025 legislative elections.”

Moldovan law enforcement needs more resources and better-trained staff working at a faster pace to tackle voter fraud, he added, to “create an environment in which anyone tempted to either buy or sell votes knows there will be clear and fast consequences.”

Savlina Adasan, a 21-year-old economics student in Bucharest, said she voted for Sandu and cited concerns about corruption and voters uninformed about the two candidates.

“We want a European future for our country,” she said, adding that it offers “many opportunities, development for our country … and I feel like if the other candidate wins, then it means that we are going 10 steps back as a country.”

Advertisement

A pro-Western government has been in power in Moldova since 2021, and a parliamentary election will be held in 2025. Moldova watchers warn that next year’s vote could be Moscow’s main target.

In the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Moldova applied to join the EU. It was granted candidate status in June of that year, and in summer 2024, Brussels agreed to start membership negotiations. The sharp westward shift irked Moscow and significantly soured relations with Chisinau.

___
As a longtime election lawyer and a leader of the nation’s oldest Latino civil rights organization, respectively, we have watched in dismay as Donald Trump and his allies have resumed their 2020-style campaign of baseless election litigation and lies. This time they are splicing in a new theme: false claims that ineligible immigrants are voting in droves. We must douse this false flame now lest Trump fan it into another postelection conflagration. And while the Supreme Court’s recent order allowing Virginia to resume its voter purge is troubling, many states’ purges have been stopped by the courts. All this makes it more critical that the decisive action that has already been taken to combat these scurrilous attacks must continue.

Advertisement

As we explain in a new report, Republicans are targeting Latino voters by repeating lies about immigrants and voting. These kinds of false claims are shaping up to be the Big Lie of 2024. In 2020, Trump justified his efforts to overturn the election with parallel racist conspiracy theories about made-up election fraud. Now, Trump and his allies are rebooting his preposterous conspiracies, this time by spreading racist lies about who is casting votes in the first place—scaremongering about immigrants voting, attacking voter registrations, and bringing scores of lawsuits.

The MAGA lies about immigrants are already bearing poisonous fruit. In Texas, Attorney General Ken Paxton has raided LULAC organizers’ homes using a state statute of dubious constitutionality. Alabama and Virginia have attempted to purge thousands of voters at the last minute based on the canard that ineligible immigrants are among them. Over the past few weeks, Texas and Florida have brought lawsuits attempting to force the Department of Homeland Security to hand over information about immigrants registered to vote—and 14 other Republican attorneys general joined a letter demanding the same data.

Advertisement

All of these efforts are based on a lie. The reality is that only eligible Americans vote in federal elections, and there are vanishingly few attempts to the contrary. For instance, a study of the 2016 election found an estimated 30 incidents of ineligible immigrants voting out of 23.5 million votes cast across 42 jurisdictions, a microscopic 0.0001 percent.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

That is partly because the laws are extremely strict: People registering to vote must attest to their citizenship and are informed they are subject to criminal prosecution if they lie. Federal law requires states to maintain centralized voter registration databases to remove ineligible voters and improve the accuracy of their voter registration systems. And states employ a variety of mechanisms to verify voters’ identities against databases such as the Social Security Administration, state departments of motor vehicles, state bureaus of vital statistics or health departments, and the U.S. Postal Service’s National Change of Address database.

Advertisement

But that has not stopped the purveyors of the new Big Lie. Take the Alabama example. Secretary of State Wes Allen on Aug. 13 initiated a purge of the state’s voter rolls. But his list of individuals included hundreds of eligible Americans. Nevertheless, not only did Allen attempt to revoke their eligibility to vote; he referred all 3,251 individuals to the state’s attorney general for criminal investigation.

This move, less than 90 days before the election, was too much even for Judge Anna M. Manasco, who was appointed to the bench by Trump. After the U.S. Department of Justice sued, she halted the program on Oct. 16 and ordered Allen to issue guidance to every county in the state to restore the voting status of people on the list.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Anti-immigrant fervor is not only a turnout tool but also an insurance policy. Trump is clearly limbering up for another campaign of lies and litigation if voters reject him once more. Given his and his allies’ vast investment of messaging and legal capital into made-up claims of immigrant voting, there can be little doubt that we will hear about it after the election as well.

Here’s what we must do to fight back. Federal and state courts must take fast and firm action. That is already happening across the nation. In the North Carolina dispute over the voter rolls, a Trump-appointed federal judge refused to entertain the RNC lawsuit seeking a purge based on claims of noncitizen involvement. Other Republican-aligned litigation initiatives have largely met the same fate (with the occasional exception).

Advertisement

Advertisement

But playing defense and rejecting Trump and his allies’ cases won’t be enough to carry the day. Pro-democracy stakeholders must go on the offense and affirmatively reassure voters that they can trust the process, that elections are secure, and that only eligible Americans vote. That’s what the DOJ did in initiating and winning its Alabama case. And although the MAGA justices on the Supreme Court are allowing Virginia to continue with its purge, all of the voters removed from the rolls can go to the polls on Tuesday and vote after same-day registering.

Advertisement

Advertisement

There’s also an important role for civil, voting, and democracy rights organizations like ours, as shown by the Texas case LULAC and allies brought—with many other examples on file and in the pipeline. It is also crucial that the media must broadcast the truth: that only eligible Americans vote, and that lies to the contrary are baseless scapegoating of immigrants and Latinos.

And finally—and most importantly—all of us must continue to reassure every eligible voter that they will have the right to cast their ballots freely, safely, and equally; that their vote will be counted and protected; and that everyone from voters, to poll workers, to election officials, to Boards of Elections, all faithfully undertake our sacred duties to respect the will of the people.
is a politics reporter at Vox, where she covers Congress and elections. Previously, she was a tech policy reporter at Politico and an editorial fellow at the Atlantic.

Support independent journalism that matters — become a Vox Member today.

Here’s everything you need to know about these pivotal states as well as when to expect results and race decisions to start coming in.

What time do polls close?

Poll closures vary by state — and in certain places, even by county — so be sure to check where you live for specifics. You can do so using this tool from Democracy Works, a nonpartisan nonprofit focused on voting participation.

Broadly, though, cutoffs start at 6 pm ET in states such as Indiana and Kentucky, with many others, including Illinois, Missouri, and Tennessee, closing at 8 pm ET. Alaska and Hawaii finish out the night, wrapping up voting at midnight and 1 am ET.

In swing states, poll closures are also staggered: Georgia, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania are the first to close at 7 pm, 7:30 pm, and 8 pm ET respectively. Some Michigan counties will close at 8 pm, while others will close at 9 pm ET. Wisconsin and Arizona both close at 9 pm ET, and Nevada is the last of the seven, closing at 10 pm ET.

When will results start coming in?

States and counties usually start disclosing results once the polls are shuttered in their jurisdictions. Many will post vote counts online as they are being processed, and news outlets and television networks may update their trackers based on these figures. These results are likely to change over time, however.

In some places, smaller and more rural counties may be able to count their ballots more quickly than larger cities, for example. Because of this, smaller towns might report their results faster, creating the impression that one candidate is ahead. This happened in 2020, when certain vote counts suggested that Trump was initially ahead in battleground states, creating a “red mirage.”

Since it takes some states longer to count mail-in votes, that dynamic can also contribute to Republicans banking an early lead since they’re less likely to use absentee ballots.

In both instances, early leads might not match the final result, with margins potentially changing significantly as more votes are tallied. In 2020, this happened in states like Pennsylvania: As more mail-in ballots were counted, as well as votes from larger cities, Biden picked up support, fueling what political observers referred to as a “blue shift.”

It’s not clear if that same dynamic will play out this cycle, but it is a helpful reminder that things could shift dramatically over the course of hours and days.

How many electoral votes does Trump or Harris need to win, again?

There are 538 Electoral College votes up for grabs, and a candidate needs to secure a majority — or 270 electoral votes — to win the presidency.

The majority of these votes are concentrated in safe red or blue states, meaning Trump and Harris are both guaranteed a sizable degree of support. The backing of some swing states, however, will be necessary for each to reach the 270-vote threshold, making them incredibly important.

So, what do I need to know about these battleground states?

The presidential race in these seven states is so close that they have the potential to flip for either Harris or Trump and deliver a sizable number of electoral votes along with it. That’s why both campaigns have been focusing their ground game and advertising here in recent weeks.

Pennsylvania Why it’s a battleground: Pennsylvania had voted Democrat for years, but was one of three states in the party’s “blue wall” that went to Trump in 2016. Biden won back the state in 2020, though Republicans have continued to maintain a strong presence, keeping control of one of two chambers in the state legislature. Given its sizable number of electoral votes, the state is a major target for both parties, and could well determine who wins the election overall. Because of how competitive the race is, the state has also been a focal point for Pennsylvania had voted Democrat for years, but was one of three states in the party’s “blue wall” that went to Trump in 2016. Biden won back the state in 2020, though Republicans have continued to maintain a strong presence, keeping control of one of two chambers in the state legislature. Given its sizable number of electoral votes, the state is a major target for both parties, and could well determine who wins the election overall. Because of how competitive the race is, the state has also been a focal point for GOP misinformation about voter fraud , which remains very rare Electoral votes: 19 How voting works: Pennsylvania isn’t allowed to process or count mail-in ballots until Election Day, which could contribute to a lag in reporting results. When to expect results: In 2020, the AP reported Biden as the winner four In 2020, the AP reported Biden as the winner four days after Election Day . The timing could be similar this election, depending on how many voters opt for mail-in ballots.



Wisconsin Why it’s a battleground: Wisconsin is the third “blue wall” state that Trump won in 2016 and Biden retook in 2020. Its status as a battleground is evident: It has a Democratic governor, one Democratic senator, one Republican senator, and two Republican-led chambers in the legislature. How voting works: Mail-in ballots in several large counties are stored in “central locations” and aren’t counted until Election Day, which can lead to some delays. Electoral votes: 10 When to expect results: In 2020, Wisconsin was In 2020, Wisconsin was called by the AP the day after the election and that could happen again.



Georgia Why it’s a battleground: Georgia only recently flipped to Democrats during the 2020 presidential election and then narrowly reelected a Democrat to the Georgia only recently flipped to Democrats during the 2020 presidential election and then narrowly reelected a Democrat to the Senate in 2022 . The state has an enduring Republican lean — evidenced by its Republican governor and two Republican-led chambers in the legislature — but has continued to shift left as it has diversified. Previously, Georgia was a major target of Trump’s attacks in 2020, when he called on officials in the state to overturn its results How voting works: Georgia has approved rules changes that enable the Georgia has approved rules changes that enable the processing of mail-in ballots earlier . These changes should expedite the process compared to 2020. Electoral votes: 16 When to expect results: In 2020, an extremely tight margin resulted in election results being called by the AP a full In 2020, an extremely tight margin resulted in election results being called by the AP a full 16 days after the race . The turnaround could potentially be faster this year depending on the margin in the race.



Nevada Why it’s a battleground: Nevada has voted Democratic pretty consistently, and is known for its strong base of left-leaning union support. It has started to move right in recent elections, however, and elected a Republican governor in 2022. This cycle, the economy — and Nevada has voted Democratic pretty consistently, and is known for its strong base of left-leaning union support. It has started to move right in recent elections, however, and elected a Republican governor in 2022. This cycle, the economy — and concerns about the state hospitality industry’s recovery post-pandemic — are key issues that may fuel discontent toward Democrats. How voting works: Nevada has expansive mail-in voting, and allows ballots received up to four days after Election Day to be counted. As a result, there could be some delays in when we know the results. Electoral votes : 6 When to expect results: In 2020, In 2020, election results were called by the AP four days after the election, and it’s possible that could happen again.



North Carolina Why it’s a battleground: North Carolina has been reliably Republican in presidential and Senate races in recent years, though it has shifted left over time. Questions have been raised for years about if and when the state could flip blue again for a national election. This year, a scandal over incendiary statements made by North Carolina has been reliably Republican in presidential and Senate races in recent years, though it has shifted left over time. Questions have been raised for years about if and when the state could flip blue again for a national election. This year, a scandal over incendiary statements made by Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson could drag down the Republican ticket as he makes a run for governor. How voting works: Processing of mail-in ballots can begin before Election Day, while the counting can’t start until then. Processing of mail-in ballots can begin before Election Day, while the counting can’t start until then. Mail ballots must also be received by Election Day this year , a change from 2020. Electoral votes: 16 When to expect results: In 2020, In 2020, the race was called by the AP 10 days after Election Day , and it’s possible it could be faster this year because of the change to mail-in ballot rules.



How will I know the race is actually called?

Vox will monitor a variety of sources before we publish election results, including the AP and the National Election Pool, a poll conducted by Edison Research and funded by several major news organizations.

States and counties are in charge of running elections, reporting results and certifying those outcomes. There’s a gap, however, between when states report the results of the election and when they declare a winner because of how long the certification process takes.

The AP is one of the entities that fills in the gap in the meantime by analyzing the unofficial results that states and counties are posting. The AP has said it makes a race call when it’s clear there is no way an opponent can make up the gap in votes.

Vox’s Ellen Ioanes has a more detailed explainer on how publications like the Associated Press make these calls.

How long is all this going to take?

It’s likely that tallying the votes could take several days, as it did in 2020. That year, in particular, it took more time to determine the winner of the election because more people used mail-in ballots due to the pandemic.

The last presidential election also saw some of the highest voter turnout in years, and extremely close margins in key swing states. Both those dynamics meant that ballot counting took longer, and that more time was needed to determine whether a candidate had secured a high enough lead to win.

In 2020, it took four days before Biden was declared the winner of the Electoral College by publications including the AP. That year, states like Georgia also saw legal challenges to their outcomes from the Trump campaign, which falsely alleged widespread fraud. States could see similar lawsuits this cycle, and those could fuel uncertainty about the legitimacy of the result, though they haven’t previously delayed calls by entities like the AP. (AP’s notable later call in Georgia in 2020 came only after the state conducted a hand audit that confirmed the outcome.)

This year, don’t be alarmed if results aren’t announced immediately once again and it takes a few days to arrive at an outcome.

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
The pain in my forehead was sharp, as if I had just slammed it against the nightstand. My eyes felt weighted by sandbags and burned when the light hit them. If I leaned forward—say, to put my head in my hands, the posture that felt correctly despondent—the strain from the back of my neck shot to the top of my skull. If I coughed, or made any sudden movement, my whole body buzzed.

I was not recovering from a car accident or an ultramarathon. Instead, over the past two days, I had watched a total of 26 hours of television from a hotel room in Livingston, Montana, during the last lengths of the 2024 election. And I wasn’t done yet. The morning shows and newsreels and college football games were swimming before my eyes. And the ads—I had seen so many ads. For skin-care products and fast-food restaurants and car manufacturers and car dealers, but especially for the Senate election between Montana Democrat Jon Tester, who has held the seat 18 years, and his Republican challenger, Tim Sheehy.

The race is perhaps the most consequential statewide showdown in the country because it could decide which party has majority control of the Senate. And with that, the ability to control so much of what the next president can do, whoever it is, from passing legislation to appointing judges to the most basic task of confirming the Cabinet members who will help shape the government.

Everyone knows those stakes—and the money pouring in from across the country to this gorgeous state reflects that. The battle for Montana has become one of the most expensive statewide races ever, expected to stand at at least $315 million when the dust settles.

Advertisement

But there’s a peculiar quirk to campaigning here: Montana may be the country’s fourth-largest state by area, but it’s only the 44th largest by population. There are a mere 650,000 active registered voters spread out across 147,000 square miles, an area roughly the size of California with one-fortieth the number of people. So, sure, volunteers knock doors and phone-bank and do rallies. But in a rural state with a libertarian ethos where homes are often spread far apart, in a country with unlimited campaign spending, that isn’t really how campaigning works. Instead, the final prairie Democrat’s last stand is being waged not on the high plains or the snowy ridges of the eastern Rockies but on the peaks and troughs of the airwaves. It is being fought on television.

Advertisement

According to AdImpact, from Super Tuesday in early March to mid-October, Montana has played host to an astronomical 387,000 political ads, second only to Pennsylvania’s 399,000. But Montana, unlike Pennsylvania, is not a swing state. It is not in play for the presidency: Trump won it by 20 points in 2020, and few things are more certain than the fact that he will win it again. It has a Republican governor (not competitive); both House representatives here are Republican; a two-thirds-Republican supermajority holds the state Legislature. There are a couple of ballot props to fight over, and, as of very recently, one of those House races has gone from “impossible” to “a reach” for Democrats. But almost all the money and attention is focused on Tester vs. Sheehy. It is a besieging of the commercial breaks of historic proportions.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

“Unavoidable,” said one Montanan I talked to, of the Senate-race ads. “Everywhere,” said another. “Nonstop,” said a third. “Absolutely obscene!” declared former Montana Gov. Marc Racicot. Some people just shook their heads at me, pupils wide, haunted by the things they’d witnessed. “What you’re seeing,” one political media buyer told me, “is the result of there just being more money than there is ad inventory to spend it on.”

I had traveled to Montana to observe and participate in the American democratic process, the way most Americans engage with American democracy—not in union halls or public forums, but on the receiving end of a one-way fire hose of paid propaganda and professional manipulation, rendered in 30-second bursts of flickering blue light, largely in isolation, via television. I rode into town for 72 hours to watch unlimited campaign ads.

Advertisement

Most Americans watch an average of three to five hours of TV a day, depending on whom you ask. I set out to watch a whole lot more than that in Montana to see the true nature of a race for nothing less than control of the upper chamber of Congress, the life and death of the American West, and the dark present and darker frontier of American democracy. If that sounds dramatic, well, you should see what was going on in my head by the end of it all.

“Your room has a view of the beautiful mountains,” said the clerk at the Fairfield Inn in Livingston when I checked in. I didn’t want to risk distraction from the world on the wrong side of the glass, so I kept the curtains drawn. It was time to begin.

Advertisement

You might reasonably ask: Couldn’t I have just searched for these ads online from the comfort of my own apartment? No: One cannot experience the true effect of advertising as the hunter, only as the hunted. I wanted to feel the full force of the advertising onslaught; I wanted to be targeted as a Montana resident, with local broadcast and a Montana IP address. Most Americans spend the fall of even-numbered years doing their best to dodge the incessant prate of political ads that seems to stalk them everywhere. I would willingly succumb to them.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

I started off my Saturday morning at 9:59 with the closing credits of a show about wild animals. Then I got my first Senate spot. “Don’t believe the lies about Jon Tester,” said two men, one of whom was identified as a Republican. Tester had worked with Republicans to shut down the border, they explained. He did not vote to tax Social Security or give benefits to “illegal immigrants,” and he definitely, definitely did not block support for white farmers. Thirty seconds later came an attack ad on Tester’s opponent. “Tim Sheehy says he grew up rural. That’s a lie,” the ad intoned. He had grown up in St. Paul, Minnesota. “Sheehy isn’t rural, and he isn’t right for Montana.”

Advertisement

I switched the channel and watched football players for the University of Miami and University of Louisville teams warm up. Miami took the lead and held it. I saw ads for Jersey Mike’s and Domino’s and various pharmaceutical products. I moved over to the University of Michigan versus Illinois and quickly saw a menacing ad that showed Tester getting a trim. For 20 years, the ad said, Jon Tester had been running on this flattop haircut because he couldn’t run on his record. This included voting to allow “$500 million to illegals.” He had backed legislation that could raise Medicare drug premiums more than 50 percent, the ad warned, with bold text over video of Tester flashing a smile in the barber’s chair, clippers chewing through flat and villainous hair, while immigrants amassed at the border in a split screen. It flowed immediately into another anti-Tester spot, a refutation of a previous ad that must have asserted that Tester was tough on China. Instead, I was informed, Tester had met with a top lobbyist of a Chinese agricultural company that’s buying up American farmland. He sold us out to China.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Illinois scored, or maybe the team punted, or maybe the quarter ended, any of which was great news because it meant we were back to ads, where I saw that Tim Sheehy is against the abortion rights initiative in Montana and could help pass a national abortion ban.

Advertisement

At 2 p.m., Montana State was about to go up against Portland State, and my TV wasn’t carrying it. This seemed certain to be an unmissable advertising opportunity, so I made the tough choice to decamp to a sports bar in a town a mile up the road, if that. There were multiple advantages to this move, beyond the simple need for me to consume food to sustain my TV consumption. There were at least 10 separate screens at the sports bar, a 270-degree panorama that in theory could also amp up my ad exposure tenfold, our American answer to the Roman forum.

At the bar, Montana State scored. I saw that Tester had amassed “large wealth” and delighted in “campaign-funded fine dining” that could have fed starving Montanans. Montana State scored again. Two separate TVs carrying different games simultaneously showed the same ad with a Republican woman saying Tim Sheehy wants to privatize health care and that Jon Tester had her vote. Then I saw an ad that said Jon Tester was F-rated by the National Rifle Association, unlike Tim Sheehy (A), and that the Second Amendment is fundamental to our Montana way of life. Then I saw an ad that said Tim Sheehy wanted “more land sold to rich out-of-staters” and that he was “not one of us.” And on it went. I looked like an owl, my head swiveling on my neck, trying to take it all in.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Two guys were sitting at the table next to me. One of them, Heath, worked in HVAC; the other, Shaw, worked in mining. I asked them what they thought of the deluge of Senate ads, and whether it was having any effect on them. “Just annoyance,” said Heath. “Effect? No.” Shaw agreed: “It’s more annoying than anything.”

Who were they supporting, I asked, and why? “Sheehy,” said Heath. “Tester has been in office for 20 years already, and everybody knows he’s gotten rich,” he said. “I’m the opposite, for Tester,” said Shaw. “I’m so sick of these rich out-of-staters raising costs.”

They had repeated back to me almost verbatim lines from the ads.

Advertising works. Everyone likes to think that advertising works only on others, not on them. Wrong. Advertising works on you.

There are plenty of studies that prove it. A review of research on attitudes toward advertising by University College of London professor Jeremy Dean found that people who thought they were unaffected by advertising were just as influenced by it as any other group. Psychology and mass media professor Richard M. Perloff found that advertising is actually even more effective on us when we don’t agree with the message or if we consider its source to be bad or its subject irrelevant. It seeps right on in.

As digital marketing executive Scott Fenstermaker, who runs a blog on the topic, put it, “We tend to overestimate our own free will and resistance to influence.”

This is well understood by corporations. Coca-Cola, for example, one of the best-known brands in the world, spent $5 billion on advertising in 2023, much of that on TV. That was not charitable giving. It is also well understood by campaigns. According to a report by the research firm Insider Intelligence, political advertising in the 2024 election cycle is expected to increase by 30 percent over 2020’s record-high explosion, to $12.32 billion. (More than $10 billion has been spent so far.) Traditional media, most of which is TV, will account for over 70 percent of that.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

There’s plenty of debate over just how effective political advertising really is, if that’s even something you can quantify. Some say it can’t be measured or is skewed by predetermined outcomes—lots of races are not even competitive to begin with. Sometimes, the candidate who spends more loses. But usually, the candidate who spends more or is backed by more outside spending wins. About 96 percent of House races, for instance, are won by the candidate who spends more money, according to Open Secrets. The bigger the race, the more money that’s spent, and usually, the biggest thing that money is spent on is ads.

“Zero question that the ads work, even with political stuff where people are absolutely jaded,” Keith Teske told me. Teske is the longtime station manager of Nonstop Local, KULR, the Billings NBC affiliate, and the person in charge of managing the placement and sales of all those ads I had been watching. “I know dyed-in-the-wool liberals who are doubting if they’re going to vote for Tester, and I know conservatives who are completely anti-Tester but are confused about ‘Shady Sheehy.’ It works.”

“ ‘Shady Sheehy’ is even a concern on the playground,” he said. That was actually the second time I’d heard that: One Montana State student I spoke with said the 7-year-old she babysits couldn’t stop talking about “Shady Sheehy.”

Right now, Teske said, was an unprecedented ad bonanza. “We’re selling $40,000 for a single ad on college football. Just sold $160,000 for five commercials,” he said, referring to blocks of last-second airtime recently purchased. “Every time you think it’s finally cooled off, something crazy flares up.” He added, “Never seen anything like it.”

A little history: The first video attack ads came in 1934, at the height of the Great Depression. Upton Sinclair, the famous socialist writer of The Jungle, had swept the Democratic gubernatorial primary in California, with massive grassroots backing on an anti-poverty platform. But after Sinclair suggested that the state hire idle studios and pay unemployed actors to make movies on their own, the head of Hollywood’s MGM Studios, Louis B. Mayer, a bigwig state Republican, and studio executive Irving Thalberg set to work making the first batch of attack ads, airing them in movie theaters before the features played. And that was basically the end of that. Sinclair lost to Republican Frank Merriam by 11 points.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Political attack ads came to television in the 1950s, alongside the rise of the medium, and by the 1952 presidential race between Republican Dwight Eisenhower and Democrat Adlai Stevenson, they were already a fixture. But they really exploded in the 2010s, after the Supreme Court opened the door for unlimited political spending by declaring that money is speech in the Citizens United decision. The super PACs that resulted are responsible for much of the increase. In the 2010 election cycle, the year of the decision, super PACs spent $61 million on political communication, aka ads. In this election, super PACs have spent $2.5 billion and raised $4.2 billion so far.

And super PACs tend to spend $4 of every $5 of their budget on TV ads.

By Sunday, Day 2, I had already witnessed great battles, and they had taken a physical toll on me.

I finished out Saturday back in the hotel, watching more college football and Saturday Night Live and competing local news programs and the rebroadcast of Saturday Night Live. I waited for one merciful commercial break without a Senate ad as sign I could call it a night, and finally got one just before 2 a.m.

I slept terribly. I had a throbbing headache. I had to force my eyeballs from retreating back into my skull. I watched the Sunday shows anyway, muting the interviews, keeping my eyelids half-drawn. The ads were still going: Jon Tester had been running on his haircut for 20 years and don’t fall for the attacks on Jon Tester they’re all lies and Tim Sheehy wants to ban abortion and Jon Tester sold us out to China.

On the ABC affiliate, I saw that it was unseasonably warm, and then an ad warned that Tim Sheehy wants to return health care to pure privatization, and another ad had a lifelong Republican pledge her vote to Jon Tester because she didn’t trust Tim Sheehy and Tester had helped her secure Social Security benefits. On the CBS affiliate, before the NFL games kicked off, one ad told me Tim Sheehy thinks government should be making medical decisions for the daughters of Republican fathers, and that Sheehy called abortion “murder.” Another ad dropped a clip-art magnifying glass on a logo on Sheehy’s shirt, as evidence he was lying about his affiliation with a group that advocated for public-land privatization—he himself wanted to privatize public lands, and we had to “stop Shady Sheehy before we lose Montana for good.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

I figured, for the sake of thoroughness, I had to survey at least one other Montana media market, so I powered down a gas-station-bought medicinal course for migraine-strength pain and drove across the Continental Divide. I installed myself in a sports bar in Butte, a mining town in the state’s western region, best known as the home of one of the country’s largest superfund sites, a gaping open pit full of toxic heavy metals and sulfuric acid and featuring groundwater with a pH of 2.5. The bar was down the street.

I watched the Detroit Lions finish off the Minnesota Vikings, and a Republican father on-screen said that Tim Sheehy thinks the government should be making medical decisions for “my girls.” I watched the Green Bay Packers beat the Houston Texans, and Jon Tester sold us out to China and don’t believe the attacks on Jon Tester they’re all lies. The 49ers kicked a field goal and we went to ad break and we got a rare four-pack, four straight Senate ads, pro-Sheehy, anti-Tester, pro-Tester, anti-Tester.

It was a gorgeous afternoon, unusually warm and sunny, and there were only four other patrons, two couples, sitting on stools in the darkened cave of the bar. They all knew one another. It didn’t take all that long before they inquired as to what exactly I was doing in there. When I told them I was there for the ads, they helpfully pointed out that while I was fixated on the ads in front of us, there were even more ads firing off on the TV screen behind me, which was broadcasting Wipeout Xtra.

Here is the deal with Wipeout Xtra: It is a game show where contestants run an elevated obstacle course, competing against various hazards and the clock to finish. Mostly, they do not succeed, and I have no idea what happens if they do. Still, I wheeled around and watched a column of spirited Australians being successively and violently deposited into mud and water.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The battle of Wipeout Xtra quickly became the greatest advertising clash I’d witnessed all weekend. An Australian woman got socked by a spring-loaded punching bag and then, for 20 years, Jon Tester had been running on his haircut and Tim Sheehy could pass a national abortion ban. An Australian man fell off an elevated platform and Jon Tester took on Big Pharma and a lifelong Republican just didn’t trust Tim Sheehy. An Australian slipped in mud and Jon Tester was cracking down on price gouging and military veterans warned that Tim Sheehy wants to privatize health care and veterans’ benefits. Down went the Australians and a lifelong Republican just didn’t trust Tim Sheehy and for 20 years Jon Tester had been running on his haircut and don’t trust the attacks on Jon Tester they’re all lies.

My head pain was quelled thanks to the drugs, but now my neck and back began to flare up, the previous day’s slouching and craning setting in. I felt for the Australians.

I asked the four patrons what they thought of the Senate ads. They groaned. “Can’t avoid ’em,” said Tom, the man sitting closest to me. I asked them, too, if they thought they were working. Again, the answer was a resounding no, and a lot of shaking of heads. I asked them if they were voting, and for whom.

“Sheehy,” said Francis, another patron, because Tester had been running for so many years, and everyone knew what he was about. “Tester,” said Tom, because taking that choice out of a woman’s hands, that’s terrible. “I don’t care if he did take money from China,” he added.

On the road back to my confinement, I listened to the radio and there, too, were Tester and Sheehy. Someone sang about a new truck and someone sang about heartbreak and someone sang about loving drinking and then Jon Tester saved Medicare.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

I was back in the hotel room for Sunday Night Football. My headache had returned with a vengeance. The Pittsburgh Steelers scored a late touchdown and drew to 15–13 at the half and Jon Tester helped a Republican woman get Social Security benefits and Spectrum offered internet and Arby’s has the meats.

The Tester–Sheehy showdown comes in the context of a rapidly changing Montana. The state has seen relatively huge population growth in recent years, perhaps owing to COVID migrations, perhaps owing to the popularity of the show Yellowstone, surely owing to the necessary labor that has followed the arrival of new residents. After the most recent census, the state was awarded an additional House seat. There are still way more cows than people, but there are a lot more people than before.

Costs have increased dramatically. The median home sale price in Montana rose by 90 percent from 2018 to 2023; median household income increased only 28 percent over that same period. The state holds the dubious distinction of being the least affordable housing market in the country.

Part of this is an influx of the superrich: The Yellowstone Club, a private luxury real-estate endeavor built on what was once public land in the town of Big Sky, claims to have the highest concentration of billionaires anywhere outside of New York City. Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, and Eric Schmidt are all members.

Another part is the rise of remote work and high-paying internet jobs, which drove up costs in a mining-and-ranching state. The state has succumbed to national inequality trends. People hate rising costs, but then they also hate the new developments that sprawl into the once-pristine or not-at-all-pristine agricultural countryside.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

One might think that local popular outrage toward outsiders would tilt the balance in favor of Jon Tester, who started out as a dirt farmer from Big Sandy. Tester has served as a senator since 2007. He presents about as Old West as a person can: portly frame, flattop haircut (ahem), left hand in a permanent shaka after he lost his three middle fingers in a meat grinder.

But Montana has also succumbed to another national trend, which is the nationalization of American politics and party polarization. Since Tester first got the seat, the Democratic Party has been summarily wiped out in the state. There were once five prairie Dems in the Senate; now there’s one. The potency of straight-ticket Republican identification has overwhelmed even the widespread disdain for wealthy outsiders: As the American Prospect pointed out, Montana’s Republican governor and both Republican House representatives are all out-of-state millionaires. So is Sheehy, who moved in from Minnesota. I saw that in an ad.

Those trends were clear enough even before COVID, so clear that they looked certain to doom Tester when he previously stood for reelection, in 2018, two years after Trump won the state by 16 points. But Tester pulled off one of the great miracles of modern politics, winning by 3.5 points.

So the national GOP circled this race and starred it and underlined it in dark red. The party threw its weight around to ensure that Sheehy got the candidacy and raised massive money to help him. Now Tester has to pull off the ultimate ticket-splitting triumph in modern political history. He has to get a bunch of Trump-voting Republicans to vote for a Democrat on the second line of their ballot.

Sheehy basically doesn’t do press and has very few events open to the public. There is barely any local news left anyway, especially in rural areas. So the only way to get exposure to him is via his ads. And Tester is meeting him where he’s at, with ads of his own.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Tester has brought billions to the state during his time in office. He’s rarely criticized as absentee. He’s not an annoying megalomaniac like red-state Democrat–turned–independent Sen. Joe Manchin. If there’s one Democrat who could pull this off, it’s Tester. Does his record really matter? Sure, but not more than the ads.

He has certain advantages with his ad-heavy approach: There are regulations in place, in TV ad buying, that afford candidates what’s called the lowest “unit rate” for a 30-second slot.

This means that Tester, who is a prodigious fundraiser, has been able use his campaign cash to pay the very lowest rate an ad space sells for on any given broadcast—the same $1,000 that, say, Lithia Dodge of Billings pays. The Sheehy campaign also pays the lowest unit rate, but Sheehy is not the fundraiser that Tester is, and Sheehy had to win a primary too, so Tester got a head start, making huge buys almost a year in advance.

There are limits on how many ads a candidate can get on any given station per week. And that’s where the super PACs come in. Super PACs pay market rate, which means they frequently pay 20 times what the candidate pays. These groups can raise money anywhere and in unlimited quantities. And if one super PAC has hit its quota for a certain channel, another one hops in.

Here’s a nonexhaustive list of super PACs and outside groups actively spending in the race on the pro-Tester side: Last Best Place PAC, WinSenate, Montana Outdoor Values Action Fund, Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, Montana Rural Voters, CFFE PAC, Your Community PAC, BIG SKY 55+, America’s Credit Unions PAC of Credit Union National Association Inc.

And for Sheehy: More Jobs, Less Government, Senate Leadership Fund, American Crossroads, Americans for Prosperity Action, NRA of America Political Victory Fund, Sentinel Action Fund, Jefferson Rising Fund, School Freedom Fund, 1889 PAC.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The result is this: According to analysis by the Wesleyan Media Project, which tracks federal ad airings by state, Montana saw 43,774 political ads in August, the most of any state in the country. Second place: Ohio, at 25,000. In September, Montana saw 85,392, the most again. October’s numbers will be higher still, guaranteed. It’s an all-guns-drawn, Wild West–style shoot-out.

It might be the last real battle for Montana. The entire middle of the country has gone one-party red, a trend that is likely to continue apace. Improbably, Tester has managed to hang close: Recent polling shows him within the margin of error; one has him tied. And though Sheehy has consistently led, his margin has been shrinking. Critically, Tester has spent more and run more ads, which, of course, is not everything. If he holds on, it won’t not be because of his record. But it will also have a lot to do with his advertising prowess.

I awoke in the dark and stared at the wall and savored the black and quiet for one brief moment. Then I turned the TV on. Good Morning America was recapping all of the sports games I’d watched the day prior and Jon Tester was running on his haircut and then he had an F-rating from the NRA and he sold us out to China.

I flipped over to the Today show, and Tim Sheehy lied about his involvement with a land-privatization group and was against abortion and didn’t support a woman’s right to choose.

The night before, this chorus had played me to sleep as my agony mounted: Jon Tester is running on a haircut because he can’t run on his record … Tim Sheehy wants to ban abortion and a woman’s right to choose … Tester sold us out to China … Sheehy is “another millionaire buying up land and driving up prices” and won’t protect my daughters’ right to choose or public lands … Tester sold us out to China … Tester’s been running on a haircut because he can’t run on his record … Don’t believe the attacks on Jon Tester … Tim Sheehy wants to ban abortion … Tim Sheehy wants to ban abortion … Sheehy caught lying about land privatization … Being a bartender in Montana, you hear a lot of things, and Sheehy lied about where he grew up, bullet in arm, about protecting public lands … Wealthy outsiders like Tim Sheehy are trying to change our state, jacking up costs … Jon Tester haircut … Don’t believe the attacks on Jon Tester … If you support the right to choose, you can’t choose Tim Sheehy …

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The battle raged. Three days into this, I had seen Tester lose the skirmish of The Voice and triumph in the siege of Saturday Night Live. I had seen great losses and unlikely feats. I was sure I had seen every ad, most of them five times, some of them probably 20.

I needed some perspective. I needed to speak with an expert on American democracy who could tell me what it all meant.

I drove 110 miles away from my hotel to Billings, to the broadcast station of the local NBC affiliate I’d been so dutifully watching. There was Keith Teske, station manager, the man who handled ad sales.

Teske sat in a chair at the head of a long conference table and leaned back. He wore a black Eddie Bauer vest (not Patagonia) and blue jeans and sported a white goatee, thick white hair, and glasses. Teske had lived a long time in old Montana, and he had worked in the industry a long time too, 25 years, starting out in radio, then helming one of the smaller outposts in the more rural part of the state. Finally, as the industry consolidated, he had been pulled off the frontier and driven back into the big city of Billings, population 185,000, to serve as station manager.

What we’re seeing—what I had been watching—had been years coming, ramping up nonstop since 2012, Teske told me.

Every two years, Teske said, he’s sure that he’s seen it all, “that nothing will surprise.” And then it happens. He gets surprised again. “In 2020 we got a last-second request for a Sunday afternoon ad on America’s Funniest Home Videos. Thirty seconds. They paid $14,000 for that spot. That’s a $30 commercial,” he said. This year, he was still blown away by what had come to pass.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

It probably wasn’t good for democracy, all that unlimited money pouring out of state and into manipulation. But if Tester lost, and Montana became a true one-party state for good, all that money would disappear. The age of Wild West TV spending in Montana would be over. “We haven’t gotten presidential money since ’08,” Teske said.

No more ad money would be bad for the Billings station, which, Teske noted, was one of the few sources of local news remaining. (The incredible windfall from 2024’s ad bonanza will be used to pay for new transmitters, he told me.) Montana’s lapse into one-party control would free the state from paid political manipulations, sure, but that would also be an indicator that the political options had disappeared too.

Still, Teske told me, he wasn’t too worried. Montanans were still sort of independent and “politics has always been up for sale,” he said. “It’s still gonna be cheaper to buy a seat here than California,” something people once said about Montana real estate. “It’s still cheaper to sway an election.”

But there was another reason the TV ad bonanza would likely soon end. Remember that TV advertising, for all its excesses, is regulated. There are lowest-unit-rate provisions for candidates and content reviews for factuality. “We answer to the FCC,” Teske said. “The reason I’m even telling you these [money] amounts is that they’re publicly available online.”

Digital ad sales, however, have been rapidly gaining on broadcast. And ads that run solely online remain totally unregulated. The future, Teske told me, would not be free of ads but full of manipulations on the internet even more obscure, from dark money groups, which, unlike super PACs, do not disclose donors. “I turn on YouTube now to listen to music, and every single ad is politics,” Teske said. “By 2030, it’ll all be different.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The whole point of local broadcast, Teske noted, was never just to sell ads. There was a higher civic purpose. It was to serve as a communication network in case of natural disaster or catastrophe. “Every day we’re live is a rehearsal,” he said, for the avalanche, or the earthquake, when that communication infrastructure could save lives. The internet might be more adept at monitoring a person’s consumption habits, and targeting them with relevant ads, but it hasn’t been able to replace that.

“I love this country; it’s given me a great life,” Teske said. But, he added, “I don’t know how sustainable this is. And if that’s how we’re making our decisions, I just don’t know.”

My quest in Montana had tanked my health, opened my dreary eyes, infested my brain. But what was coming over the horizon was darker still. The Wild West might be closing, but the frontier was wide open online. “It’s a little bit scary, just to be honest,” Teske told me. “It’s scary.”
On Sept. 10, during the presidential debate hosted by ABC News, Republican candidate Donald Trump told an obvious lie. While attempting to malign the immigration policies of his Democratic opponent, Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump claimed that Haitian immigrants in Ohio had been kidnapping and eating residents’ household pets. “In Springfield, they’re eating the dogs. The people that came in. They’re eating the cats,” Trump said. “They’re eating—they’re eating the pets of the people that live there.”

They weren’t, of course, and debate moderator David Muir quickly jumped in to try to set the record straight. Although Trump’s claim had gained credence in right-wing social-media circles in the days preceding the debate, Muir noted that ABC News had consulted the city manager of Springfield, Ohio, who attested that “there have been no credible reports of specific claims of pets being harmed, injured or abused by individuals within the immigrant community.” Undaunted, Trump continued to press his point, insisting that “the people on television say their dog was eaten by the people that went there.”

“Again, the Springfield city manager says there’s no evidence of that,” said Muir.

“We’ll find out,” said Trump—and, in the days and weeks to come, we certainly did. In the immediate aftermath of the debate, the mainstream media’s fact-checking platforms sprang into action. At PolitiFact, Jeff Cercone assigned Trump’s assertion a “Pants on Fire” rating on the site’s “Truth-o-Meter,” noting that the claim “appears to stem from an unverified secondhand Facebook post.” At the Washington Post’s Fact Checker, Glenn Kessler noted that “Trump is referencing a ridiculous social media hoax” and said “there is no evidence that Haitians are doing this.” FactCheck.org, the Associated Press, Reuters, NPR, the New York Times, CNN, and many other outlets offered similar fact checks of Trump’s risible claim; each of these outlets deemed it categorically false.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Pretty much all of these rebuttals conformed to the tone, style, and structure that have become the standard format for journalistic fact-checking in the internet era. The fact checks established the claim in question; offered evidence-based explanations for its falsity, in the form of unequivocal denials from local officials; traced the claim back to its origins (unverified social-media posts); and put it in the context of the broader rhetorical trends that have made immigration such a polarizing and racially charged political issue. They did all this in neutral editorial voices, clearly meant to promote the appearance of objectivity; they showed their work to make clear that their judgments weren’t just matters of opinion. The various fact checks rebutted Trump’s pet-eating lie quickly, clearly, and convincingly, in a manner designed to reach and persuade people across the political spectrum.

Advertisement

And that should have been that—except, for roughly half the country, it wasn’t. The fact checks did not seem to make much difference to either Trump or his followers’ willingness to assert and believe an obvious lie. If anything, the mainstream media’s clear and uniform refutation of Trump’s claim seemed to serve as evidence that it was actually true, and that, once again, the left was conspiring to conceal the truth and sabotage Trump’s campaign. In the days and weeks following the Sept. 10 debate, Trump and his surrogates refused to back down from the “Haitians are eating pets” canard. Their defiance seemed to embolden many Trump supporters from around the country, who barraged Springfield, Ohio, with menacing phone calls and dozens of bomb threats. One week after Trump’s pet-eating lie had been convincingly debunked, a YouGov poll found that a majority of Trump supporters deemed it to be true, while only 5 percent of Trump supporters found it to be “definitely false.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

When, in the distant future, liberal-arts robots sit down to write the official history of this dangerously stupid political era, they may well use the Haitian pet-eating saga to illustrate the extent to which the 2020s were so very epistemically fucked. Consider: A dumb, racist rumor was born on social media. The country’s most consequential political figure then vaguely and viciously asserted the rumor as fact, thus giving his fans and followers permission to do the same. And despite the combined efforts of the world’s best-resourced and most scrupulous journalistic organizations to rebut it—despite the great care these groups took to investigate the claim, to show their work, to avoid the appearance of bias, and to package their output to appeal to as many people as possible—most of Donald Trump’s supporters continued to insist that his inept lie was actually true.

Advertisement

This same conflict between fact-checking and fiction has played out countless times over the past decade, to the detriment of pretty much everyone except the transparent charlatan who is, for the third consecutive election cycle, the Republican presidential nominee. Over and over again, Trump and his cohort will tell an obvious lie—about Haitians eating pets in Ohio, or blue-state doctors performing post-birth abortions, or rigged voting machines and the 2020 election, or any number of other things, take your pick. They offer no credible evidence to support what they’re saying; indeed, they almost seem to flaunt the flimsiness of their claims. The mainstream media then tries to refute these claims using evidence, logic, and linear argument. Then, generally without even bothering to read or consider these counterpoints, the Republican electorate dismisses them with cries of “fake news”—and then, three hours later, everyone does it all again.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The presidential election is now here, and the fact that the very fate of American democracy somehow once again hinges on its outcome is in itself proof that what journalists are doing to combat political misinformation and separate fact from fiction largely isn’t working. No matter how much proof the media musters about Donald Trump’s lies, crimes, and derelictions, no matter how eloquent the cases pundits make about his manifest unfitness for office, no matter how hard journalists try to document their processes and present their work in compelling ways, half the country continues to demean and disregard their efforts while choosing instead to trust real-estate hucksters, YouTube supplement salesmen, disheveled podcast conspiracists, and countless other unreliable sources that barely even bother to appear credible.

Advertisement

For a decade now, and with extra-special urgency amid Trump’s political reemergence over the past year or so, journalists have made the same arguments, deployed the same formats, and issued the same sorts of rebuttals, all under the presumption that at some point the sheer weight of accumulated evidence has to break through the walls of denial that Trump’s supporters have built up to shield themselves from apology and accountability. But the breakthrough never comes. The lies keep getting worse. And the media keeps relying on methods and formats that clearly no longer suit this desperate moment. What we in the media do—and don’t do—with this indisputable fact will change everything about the moment ahead, no matter who wins this presidential race.

Advertisement

Washington Post owner Jeff Bezos and others have speculated that one way to regain the trust of skeptical conservatives and combat their charges of mainstream-media bias is for journalistic outlets to work even harder to promote the appearance of objectivity. To that end, the Post last week announced that it would not endorse a candidate in this year’s presidential election. In an op-ed headlined “The Hard Truth: Americans Don’t Trust the News Media,” Bezos implied that this step is but one of many that the Post will take in its efforts to persuade its haters that the newspaper is actually worthy of their trust.

Advertisement

This strategy is viable only if you also believe that all the people shouting about media bias a) are doing so for rational reasons, and b) are willing to be persuaded otherwise. But if the appearance of extreme objectivity is all that it takes to bridge the journalism trust gap and appease the Trumpist right, then why haven’t the various stand-alone fact-checking platforms already unlocked this achievement? After all, these platforms—neutral to a fault, and almost pathologically scrupulous—already are what Bezos apparently wants the Post to become. They stick to the facts, they take on politicians of all stripes, they show their work, and they offer little if any institutional voice. The fact-checkers already attempt to be all things to all people, and half the people still choose to disregard their work whenever that work conflicts with their political preconceptions.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Stand-alone online journalistic fact-checking has been with us now for at least six presidential election cycles. (Factcheck.org was launched in 2003; PolitiFact and the Washington Post’s Fact Checker both launched in 2007.) In 2012, for the Columbia Journalism Review, I sat in on a PolitiFact editorial meeting and saw firsthand how systematically the fact-checkers there rendered their judgments, and how seriously they took their mission.

As long as the fact-checkers have been handing out “Pants on Fires” and “Pinocchios,” people have challenged their verdicts and questioned their methodologies. Most of these critiques have generally been sour grapes from political actors who don’t appreciate being called out on their bullshit. But even back in 2012, there were those who realized that the fact-checkers’ efficacy relied on the public’s willingness to accept their authority. “What if it turns out that when the press calls a lie a lie, nobody cares?” then-Atlantic editor James Bennet asked in a 2012 piece about the relative unscrupulousness of Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign. In the intervening 12 years, Bennet’s question has only become more relevant.

Advertisement

Advertisement

And over the past year or so, I have come to regard online fact-checking platforms as perhaps the foremost symbols of journalistic impotence in the Trump era. Your PolitiFacts and your Fact Checkers and such are the most well-intentioned websites in the world. Their missions—basically, to serve as neutral, credible platforms for evaluating the relative truth and falsity of statements and rhetoric across the political spectrum—are laudable and entirely uncontroversial. Their output is voluminous, their methods are clear, their integrity is evident, and their impact appears to be negligible.

Despite the fact-checkers’ best efforts to appeal to everyone by sticking to the facts, half the country seemingly pays no attention at all to their work, and the other half just gets frustrated that the fact-checkers’ inherent “view from nowhere” can sometimes lead them to falsely equate picayune Democratic exaggerations with the fundamental moral rot that infects the heart of Trumpist Republican politics. Here’s my favorite recent example of this sort of unhelpful pedantry:

Advertisement

We need a total and complete shutdown of "fact checking" until our we can figure out what is going on pic.twitter.com/KR7VG96b7s — Steven Lemongello (@SteveLemongello) August 23, 2024

The screenshot in the above post was excerpted from an August PolitiFact piece checking the accuracy of Kamala Harris’ acceptance speech, in which the outlet graded as “Mostly False” Harris’ claim that Donald Trump “plans to create a national anti-abortion coordinator and force states to report on women’s miscarriages and abortions.” Why did PolitiFact deem this statement to be mostly false? “What Harris describes is Project 2025. Although the 900-page policy manual makes such recommendations, it isn’t Trump’s plan,” the outlet wrote, noting that while the Heritage Foundation “got input from dozens of Trump allies” while preparing the document, “Trump and his campaign have repeatedly said they were not involved in the project and Trump is not listed as an author, editor or contributor.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

But what this deeply unconvincing rebuttal omits is any acknowledgment of the plain fact that Donald Trump lies all the time, about everything, and that only a naive fool would take him at his word about anything. The fact check is amnesiac insofar as it does not acknowledge the clear pattern of deceit from the man whose denial it takes at face value. Donald Trump falsely shouts “Fire!” in a crowded theater, so to speak, every day of his life. That context is absolutely necessary when evaluating anything he says. So why does it sometimes feel like the fact-checkers are unwilling to provide it?

Reporters laboring under a mandate of objectivity can sometimes feel pressured to pretend that America’s two main political parties share a baseline legitimacy. This false equivalence does both journalists and readers a great disservice. The Democrats today are just a typical political party: Sometimes their leaders tell the truth, sometimes they lie, sometimes they exaggerate. Their incidental exaggerations are categorically different than the foundational lies told every day by their opponents on the Trumpist right. While every honest observer knows this, the baseline neutrality that undergirds fact-checking prevents the fact-checkers from saying so; moreover, it requires them to pretend not just that each party is equally apt to lie to voters, but that the scope, intent, and implications of these lies are somehow functionally equivalent.

Advertisement

But that’s just not the case. Trump and his cohort lie constantly, about pretty much everything. They do this with relative impunity, because over decades the right has conditioned its core voters to mistrust and disregard the mainstream media. Plus, to an extent, I suspect that these core voters sort of like it when their politicians lie to them. Many right-wing voters are all too happy to commit to asserting fiction as truth, as long as that fiction flatters their personal and political biases.

Advertisement

Let me try to put this more succinctly. The American right has been captured by a self-dealing cadre of liars and crackpots determined to make epistemic war on journalists, scholars, and anyone else whose pesky adherence to facts and logic might hamper the implementation of their rancid political project. Pointing out these true things does not count as media bias—and, conversely, pretending that the Trumpist right is normal does not count as objectivity. It is only Potemkin objectivity: empty, unconvincing, and ultimately wielded in service of something awful.

Advertisement

The fact-checkers specifically, and omnibus journalistic outlets more broadly, have failed our current moment in large part by neither acknowledging nor confronting the epistemic disparities between left and right in the Trumpist era. The seeds of these failures were planted decades ago, at the dawn of online fact-checking, when scholars and news innovators still believed that new media might be a boon to both journalism and democracy—and almost no one was willing to entertain the proposition that the internet might actually make everything worse. Unfortunately, the internet did not bring about a new age of reason. Instead, it hollowed out newsrooms while privileging callow plutocrats who smarmily inform us that civility and neutrality will cure the crisis that they and their peers created.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The new-media outlets founded in more hopeful times must do more to adjust to the realities of the dark future we ended up with. Logic and reason do not drive the Trumpist right, and rationality is not what is motivating their mistrust in the mainstream media, and it is folly to think that doubling down on a commitment to principles that these people have already rejected is all it will take for news organizations to win these people back. If these people can be persuaded at all, they will be persuaded not by neutrality, but by narrative. Trump and his useful idiots are very good at offering their followers narratives of conspiracy and decline that purport to explain the state of the world. The media must find better ways to roll their individual callouts of Trumpist deceit into clear, compelling counternarratives that lay bare the broader pattern.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Perhaps, in a PolitiFact-free world, the Trump-Harris split would be 60–40 instead of 50–50. It is probably unfair to say that these platforms aren’t working at all just because they aren’t working as well as they could be working. And it is definitely not my intention to portray these outlets as “the whole problem.” The “whole problem,” instead, is the editorial mindset that pretends that maintaining false balance will somehow help make America become normal again.

Advertisement

But we might as well be honest about that desperately false hope, too. Because all signals indicate that the fever isn’t going to break. The irrationality that motivates so many on the right isn’t going to subside. The unkempt podcasters won’t lose their audiences; the racist memes won’t fall out of fashion; the people who think that 5G wireless is a Democrat plot to scramble their brains aren’t going to suddenly sober up and start taking their cues from Ezra Klein. A Trump loss this week week will only beget another Trump campaign next time, or, at best, a candidate who is directly influenced by Trump. The world we are living in is the world we are stuck with, at least for the foreseeable future. It is well past time for the media to stop wringing its hands over appearances and to get down to doing the honest, clear-eyed, uncensored work that this world needs.
On the last episode of “Fox News Sunday” before Election Day, Democratic Sen. Mark Kelly of Arizona raised an important criticism about Donald Trump: The former president, the Arizona senator said, is trying to “set up the conditions where he can do what he did in 2020.”

Host Shannon Bream quickly interrupted to say that Trump, at the end of his term, “did leave in 2020.” It fell to Kelly to remind the host and viewers that the Republican left office “after he sent a mob to Capitol Hill,” adding, “There are people who died that day because Donald Trump refused to accept the election.”

The exchange was notable for a variety of reasons, not the least of which was the familiarity of Bream’s argument. Indeed, it’s the line the former president’s defenders have peddled for nearly four years.

Yes, Trump rejected legitimate election results because he disapproved of the voters’ verdict. Yes, he tried to overturn the outcome in ways federal prosecutors believe were blatantly illegal. Yes, he filled his radicalized followers with lies, incited a riot, and deployed an armed mob to attack the U.S. Capitol, as part of a plot to seize illegitimate power by force.

But when it was time for his successor’s inauguration, Republicans argue, at least Trump left the White House when he was supposed to.

It was against this backdrop that the GOP candidate, just hours after Bream’s observation, expressed regret for having left the White House when he was supposed to. NBC News reported:

At another point in the [Pennsylvania] rally, Trump said he should not have left the White House on Jan. 20, 2021, when Biden was sworn in. “The day that I left, I shouldn’t have left. I mean, honestly, because we did so, we did so well,” the former president told supporters.

He didn’t appear to be kidding.

In other words, with just two days remaining before Election Day, as undecided voters made up their minds, the Republican nominee for the nation’s highest office reminded the public about his increasingly overt hostility toward democracy.

This was, by all accounts, supposed to be a speech summarizing his closing message, focused on the stakes in the 2024 race. True to form, Trump departed from his script and focused anew on his post-defeat grievances from 2020. As The New York Times’ report on the rally summarized, “With the remarks, Mr. Trump used the final days of his campaign to offer voters a stark reminder of the violence that came at the end of his term when, after weeks of his false claims that he had won an election he had lost, a mob of his supporters stormed the Capitol to try to prevent the certification of President Biden’s victory.”

A Politico report, meanwhile, described Trump’s “shouldn’t have left” rhetoric as “a remarkable admission from a former president whose attempts to cling to power led to a deadly riot at the Capitol.”

Welcome to Election Week 2024.
Trump and Harris were in Reading, Pa., today, thanks to a comment about Puerto Rico

toggle caption Carmen Russell-Sluchansky/WHYY

READING, Pa. — Sitting in El Mofongo Restaurant, Joseph Nuñez hunches over a table, his chin resting in his hands, reflecting on the joke from a comedian a week earlier that had undermined months of his work trying to persuade Latino voters to support former President Donald Trump.

The timing of that joke at Trump’s rally at Madison Square Garden — a punchline that called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage” just before Election Day — could not have been worse, said Nuñez, who represents Reading on the Berks County Republican Committee. More than 70% of people in Reading are Latino, most of them Puerto Rican.

“We are fighting tooth and nail — I mean literally tooth and nail — every day. We're on the ground, we're on the streets,” said Nuñez in an interview on Saturday.

toggle caption Carmen Russell-Sluchansky/WHYY

On Monday, this city of about 95,000 people was at the epicenter of the final day of the 2024 election. Trump held a rally here. Vice President Harris held one in Allentown, and afterward drove an hour to Reading to shake hands and pick up dinner at the Old Juan Cafe.

Sponsor Message

The fact that both candidates made time for Reading on the eve of the election reflects that this is a region that could decide which candidate wins the state — and that could well decide who becomes the next president.

Trump didn't address the controversy in his remarks on Monday. Harris, at her Allentown rally, talked about her relationship with Puerto Rico and thanked local community leaders for attending.

Fat Joe, a rapper who introduced her, was more direct about the joke. "Where is your orgullo?" he asked. "Where is your pride?" urging Latinos to vote for Harris.

toggle caption Carmen Russell-Sluchansky/WHYY

For Democrats, the joke was a 'political gift'

The timing of that joke could not have been better for Democrats. It came on the day Harris released a video proposing a new task force to work on the Puerto Rican economy and its longstanding power grid issues — and as she visited a Puerto Rican restaurant in Philadelphia.

After the joke, megastar Bad Bunny and a firmament of other Boricua celebrities denounced the joke and endorsed Harris. Jennifer Lopez gave a passionate address to a rally in Las Vegas. And on Saturday, actor Rosie Perez was canvassing for Harris in Reading.

“We were given a gift by the Republican Party on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden and we're capitalizing on it. And so that's why I'm here,” Perez said in an interview.

There are about 580,000 Latino voters living in the Pennsylvania, most of them with Puerto Rican ties.

Sponsor Message

“It just boggles my mind that people still want to vote for this man,” Perez said.

Joining Perez, local resident Eva Clemente — who grew up on the island — said the joke was personal. “He's talking about our ancestors, our families, our parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles,” Clemente said.

“He doesn't care about Puerto Ricans, Latinos. He only cares about himself and his rich people,” she said.

She and her husband Osvaldo said they are voting for Harris. “We got to move on from this freaking guy,” Osvaldo Clemente said. “He's dividing everybody, putting everybody against each other. We got to get him out and start being normal again.

toggle caption Carmen Russell-Sluchansky/WHYY

Republicans are working to move past the joke

Ever since that joke, Nuñez has been taking a lot of incoming. “‘How are you going to represent someone that is just disrespecting us like this? I can't believe that you're still vouching for this guy.’ Things like that. I could go on,” he said in an interview. “I've been called racist more than I can count.”

The Trump campaign set up shop in downtown Reading months ago — part of its strategy to made inroads in Pennsylvania’s Latino community.

Trump held another rally here just three weeks ago. “I think that a lot of people are seeing the value of what we are bringing to the table,” said Nuñez, whose parents are Dominican. He said Latino voters have strong conservative values.

Sitting nearby, David deJesus said he is leaning toward voting for Trump, though the offensive joke about his island gave him pause. “I like the family values, and he’s protecting that,” deJesus said.

His wife Dina said she doesn’t like Harris because she supported gender-affirming medical treatment for transgender people during her 2019 campaign — an issue that the Trump campaign has spent millions advertising on television. But DeJesus said she was leaning toward not voting.

“Trump — his craziness… and Kamala, I feel like she’s not backing up the way family values are,” she explained.

Misael Nieves, a registered Republican who lives near Philadelphia, said he plans to vote for Trump despite the sting of the joke. “I did feel offended because I'm Puerto Rican and we're proud. We're proud people,” Nieves said.

“It doesn't take my focus off of the endgame — to get our country back to where it needs to be, financially, security and everything,” Nieves said. “Our country, I believe, was a lot better when he was in office, and safer.”

NPR's Washington Desk contributed to this story.
The Thursday before Election Day, Vice President Kamala Harris’ presidential campaign dropped an ad appealing directly to Puerto Rican voters. Unlike a previous video released a day after Trump-supporting comedian Tony Hinchcliffe called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage,” this new video was a master class in how to pull at the heartstrings of Boricua identity and pride.

If there is one presidential campaign truth coming out of Sunday’s garbage joke, it’s that Puerto Ricans are fired up to vote in 2024.

The video, called “Somos más” (we are more), featured a Spanish-speaking narrator, with his very noticeable Puerto Rican accent, listing the many reasons why Puerto Rico and its people should never be disrespected. It was a rare moment when Democrats got their message right for Puerto Rican voters and their Latino allies.

Of course, the ad was not for Puerto Ricans living on the island. Being a colony means that Puerto Rico’s 3 million residents can’t vote for president even though they are American citizens. It’s complicated as to why, and with just days until Election Day, the Harris campaign was not about to have the uncomfortable yet necessary conversations about why Puerto Ricans continue to be ignored by both Republicans and Democrats. Colonialism has that effect.

No, this ad was all about the nearly 1 million Puerto Ricans who can vote in swing states, where they live. And if there is one presidential campaign truth coming out of Sunday’s garbage joke, it’s that Puerto Ricans are fired up to vote in 2024, and the Harris campaign is wise to make sure they do.

They could in fact be the next swing state power brokers, particularly in states like Pennsylvania, where more than 300,000 voters of Puerto Rican descent are eligible to vote. In 2020, Joe Biden won the state by around 81,000 votes. If the last week has significantly raised the Boricua desire to not vote for Trump and to vote for Harris, then the state will stay in the Democratic column.

According to The Center for Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College, Florida residents of Puerto Rican descent represent 5.7% of the state. Ohio, North Carolina, and Wisconsin are at 1%. In Arizona, Puerto Ricans account for 0.9% of the state, with Nevada coming in at 0.8%. In these races where just thousands of votes will determine Electoral College winners, playing up the events of last week and raising awareness among Puerto Ricans have a real chance of making a difference for Harris.

Understandably, the Trump campaign is doing everything it can to diffuse that possibility. Biden’s response to the “garbage joke” could have given Trump a lifeline; at a Tuesday rally in Allentown, where the population is about 25% Puerto Rican, Trump insisted he “will deliver the best future for Puerto Ricans and for Hispanic Americans.” At the same event, Zoraida Buxó, a Republican Puerto Rican pro-statehood supporter and a “shadow senator” of the island’s current pro-statehood government, publicly supported Trump, saying, “We need this man back in the White House. We need this man to be our commander-in-chief. He will make us feel safe. And he will protect us.”

But Buxó’s Trump endorsement lacks the star power and influence of a number of prominent Puerto Rican celebrities who have publicly voiced their support for Harris, from Jennifer Lopez to Bad Bunny to Ricky Martin to Puerto Rican-Dominican reggaeton star Nicky Jam, who in September was all for Trump, but on Wednesday, took it all back.

“Never in my life did I think that just one month later a comedian would show up and criticize my country, and speak poorly of my country. And for that, I revoke any support for Donald Trump and I’m stepping aside from any kind of political situation. Puerto Rico is to be respected,” Jam posted on social media.

This sentiment is strongly echoed on the island itself, where people in Puerto Rico are fed up with their colonial status, as political anthropologist Yarimar Bonilla explains in her excellent New York Times opinion piece, in which she highlights how Puerto Rico’s younger generation “is determined to reclaim the island’s future.” Puerto Rico’s general election this year falls on the same day as the United States’s presidential election. History would be made if the island were to elect its first pro-independence governor, Juan Dalmau.

If Puerto Ricans in the diaspora mobilize and vote in record numbers, they will be issuing a declaration that they cannot be marginalized. Their message: Respect for Puerto Rico and its people is no longer optional.

As both Election Days approach, Puerto Rican voters in swing states can remain reactive to the predictable cycle of political neglect — or use this moment to signal their collective power. The Harris campaign’s recent ad is an acknowledgment of their potential, but it’s only the beginning. If Puerto Ricans in the diaspora mobilize and vote in record numbers, they will be issuing a declaration that they cannot be marginalized. Their message: Respect for Puerto Rico and its people is no longer optional.

Increased Puerto Rican electoral participation in the 2024 U.S. election could mean something even more significant than keeping Democrats in the White House. Despite the perceived tension between Boricuas in the diaspora and those who live in Puerto Rico, the reality is that stateside Puerto Ricans can flex their political power on Election Day to raise awareness of the ongoing injustice on the island caused by years of neglect from federal government disaster relief, inept power companies, a federally appointed fiscal control board supported by both Democrats and Republicans, and a desire for Boricua voices to be heard after the votes are cast.

Puerto Rican voters on Election Day can do just that.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
New York CNN —

Inflation’s fingerprints are all over the 2024 race for the White House.

Skyrocketing prices at the gas station, the supermarket and virtually everywhere else frightened Americans in the early days of President Joe Biden’s term.

Fair or not, inflation almost immediately turned voters off to Bidenomics and clouded his reelection chances.

Now, the inflation rate is nearly back to normal – miraculously, without the recession and loss of millions of jobs that many predicted. The economy’s growth rate is relatively high, and unemployment rate remains historically low.

Soft landing or not, voters remain frustrated. And who can blame them?

Life is so much more expensive than it was just a few years ago. Prices have not returned to pre-Covid levels, and they likely never will.

For far too many, the American Dream feels out of reach.

It’s not just record-high home prices, it’s the fact that mortgage rates remain high even after an aggressive rate cut from the Federal Reserve. Some lucky first-time buyers got in when prices were lower and it was dirt-cheap to borrow. Many others are on the outside looking in.

Affordability frustrations continue to haunt Vice President Kamala Harris, who has been forced to repeatedly defend the administration’s economic track record.

Harris has made tackling prices a centerpiece of her agenda. She has called for boosting the minimum wage, ramping up tax credits for parents and building more homes.

Even as Harris made her closing argument from the historically significant Ellipse with the White House in the background, she prioritized affordability.

“Now our biggest challenge is to lower costs, costs that were rising even before the pandemic and that are still too high. I get it,” Harris said in her major speech last week.

Harris also gets that the economic anxiety fueled by inflation has helped boost the popularity of her opponent, former President Donald Trump.

Trump loves to remind voters that inflation wasn’t a problem when he was in the White House.

And he’s got a point: The inflation rate never exceeded 3% under Trump – a far cry from the four-decade high of 9.1% under Biden.

Of course, Trump didn’t face the supply chain nightmare that helped cause prices to spike. And he didn’t have oil prices surge above $100 a barrel when Russia invaded Ukraine, an energy crisis that lifted gas to record-high prices.

No matter the cause, prices are clearly much higher today.

The typical US household is spending $1,120 more per month to buy the same goods and services as in January 2021 when Biden became president, according to Moody’s Analytics.

But it’s also true that workers today are enjoying real wage increases.

Income is consistently increasing at a faster pace than inflation. That means paychecks are beating prices, a trend that should allow consumers to catch up and feel better.

The typical household is making $1,192 more per month than in January 2021, narrowly outpacing inflation, according to Moody’s.

Still, that doesn’t feel good enough.

Many Americans are working extremely hard and deserve those pay increases. It can be deeply frustrating if fatter paychecks are swallowed up by higher rent and bigger car insurance payments.

Trump has promised to get the cost of living under control by shaking things up.

“I will end inflation,” Trump told a roaring crowd of supporters in battleground North Carolina on Wednesday. “I will bring back a thing called the American Dream.”

Trump has proposed imposing tariffs on all $3 trillion of US imports, including steep tariffs of 60% on China. His plan calls for mass deportations as part of an unprecedented immigration crackdown. And Trump has argued that the president should at least get to voice an opinion in Federal Reserve policy on interest rates.

Trump’s calls for forceful action and sweeping change have resonated with many voters. In many polls, more voters say they trust Trump over Harris on the economy.

And yet one of the greatest ironies is that mainstream economists aren’t just dismissing Trump’s promise to solve inflation, they warn his fixes will make the situation much worse.

They fear his tariffs will spike prices for consumers and that deporting millions of undocumented workers will cause a labor shortage.

In fact, some argue that Trump’s policy proposals are extremely inflationary, perhaps the most inflationary of a major presidential candidate in a lifetime.

More than two-thirds of economists (68%) surveyed by The Wall Street Journal say prices will be higher under Trump than Harris.

“Just as Mexico didn’t pay for a wall in his first term, China will not pay for Trump’s tariffs if he’s given a second term. You will,” economists wrote in an open letter that has gathered more than 300 signatories in recent days.

And yet if Trump wins, it will be in large part because of…inflation.
10 key demographic groups that could decide the presidential election

toggle caption John Moore/Getty Images

If the polls are to be believed, this presidential election is expected to be tight. But beneath the closeness of the head-to-head numbers, there have been some important shifts happening in American politics.

Below is a guide to the groups to pay closest attention to on election night that could tell the story of how — and why — former President Donald Trump or Vice President Harris wins.

1. Watch the number of white voters who go for Harris.

The largest single voting group is white voters. Republicans have been dominant with them in the last 20 years, but with the growing Latino and Asian American populations, white voters have been on a sharp decline as a share of the electorate since the 1990s.

Loading...

Because of that demographic change, former President Barack Obama was the first candidate to win a presidential election with less than 40% of the white vote in 2012. Democrat Hillary Clinton lost in 2016 when she got 2 points lower (37%). Biden won four years later and was above 40%.

The October NPR/PBS News/Marist poll showed Harris winning 45% of white voters. If that were to hold, it would be the highest share for a Democrat since 1976. But Harris still only had a 2-point lead over Trump in the survey because of Trump cutting into margins with Black and Latino voters.

2. The split among white voters by education has been the story of the Trump era and only growing.

Almost nothing now is a better predictor of how white voters will vote than whether or not they have a college degree. White voters with college degrees had long been reliable Republican voters. But that changed between 2016 and 2020, when Biden won them narrowly.

Polling suggests Democrats’ advantage with them could balloon in this election.

Loading...

In 2016, Trump won the group in five of the seven swing states, but in 2020, President Biden won them in six of seven.

The opposite has been true with white voters who don’t have college degrees. They have been trending heavily toward Republicans, and the Trump team believes it can turn out even more of them this year, even though they are generally less likely to vote at all.

White voters without degrees, many of whom live in rural areas, are declining as a share of eligible voters in the country. But in key states, they still make up a larger percentage of eligible voters than whites with degrees. That’s true, for example, in the Blue Wall states of Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania. In every one of the seven swing states, white non-college voters made up a higher share of the electorate than in 2016.

Trump, though, won them by less in six of the seven swing states, except North Carolina. It will be a tall task for Harris to replicate Biden’s inroads, but she has made that a critical piece of her strategy — losing by less.



Sponsor Message

3. Mind the gender gap.

Women have made up a majority of the electorate in every presidential election in the last 40 years. Democrats won their largest share of women in 2020 — 57%, according to exit polls.

Democrats hope that number goes even higher this year, given the party’s intense focus on women’s reproductive rights, and the fact that this is the first general election since the overturning of Roe v. Wade.

Loading...

Pair that with Trump’s apparent depth of support with men this year, the gender gap could be the widest in any presidential election ever. The last two elections showed very wide gaps — 24 points in 2016, and 23 in 2020. The latest NPR poll showed it was a whopping 34 points.

But this isn’t strictly a men-women divide. There are nuances within the groups by education and race.

The education divide is very prominent here. The gap is widest with women who have a college degree and men who don’t . Biden won college-graduate white women by 9 points, while Trump won white women without degrees by 27. Trump won college-graduate white men by 3 points, but won white, non-college men 70% to 28%.

By race, white women voted 11 points in favor of Trump in 2020. Black women, though, voted for Biden by 81 points (that’s not a misprint). Latinas also broke overwhelmingly for Biden, too, 69% to 30%.



4. Does Trump cut the margins with Black voters?

There has been a lot made in this election of Trump trying to siphon off young, Black men from the Democratic Party. It’s tough to tell how real that is from pre-election polling because of how large the margins of error are with subgroups in national polls.

Sponsor Message

Post-election exit polls in heavily African American counties will give a better understanding of Trump’s level of success with this group. In 2020, 87% of Black voters sided with Biden. That was down marginally from Obama-era levels, but on par with past Democrats and high enough to win.

But pre-election polling suggests Harris, who would be the first Black woman to be president, could win them by the smallest margin of any Democrat ever. The latest NPR poll had her winning just 78% of Black voters.

Loading...

That’s an outcome Democratic pollsters and strategists are skeptical of, but concerned about, and certainly something important to keep an eye on.

Black voters may be only 13% of the vote nationally, but they are crucial to Democrats’ chances in the swing states, particularly in Georgia, North Carolina and Michigan, which all have Black eligible-voter populations that are higher than the national average.



5. Despite his rhetoric, can Trump peel off Latinos, or do they ultimately side in big numbers for Harris?

Latinos are the largest-growing group in the country. They have increased as a share of the electorate in each of the last seven presidential elections and have increased substantially as a share of the electorate in each of the seven swing states.

They could be particularly influential in Arizona and Nevada, where they made up about 1 in 5 voters in 2020. They are also notable portions of the voting populations in the other swing states. In North Carolina, for example, they are nearly 8% of the eligible-voter population, up four-fold since 2008. In Georgia, they are just over 7%, having doubled since 2008.

Loading...

Latinos have voted for the Democratic presidential candidate in each of the last four presidential elections by at least a 2-to-1 margin. Republicans came closest in 2004 when President George W. Bush was running for reelection.

The former Texas governor embraced comprehensive immigration overhauls, but was blocked by members of Congress in his own party. It’s been a similar story with every immigration push since.

After receiving just 27% of the Latino vote in 2012, the Republican National Committee called for changing the party’s approach on immigration.

“[W]e must embrace and champion comprehensive immigration reform,” the RNC’s “Growth & Opportunity Project ” stated in 2013. “If we do not, our Party’s appeal will continue to shrink to its core constituencies only.”

Trump went the opposite way. He demonized immigrants and juiced his base with a nativist and nationalistic message — similar to what has been successful for right-wing strongmen in other countries in recent years.

Despite that approach, Trump actually gained among Latinos in 2020. Biden won them in the seven most closely watched swing states, but by less than Clinton did in 2016.

Loading...

Polls have shown Trump doing better with the group in 2024, too, largely because of concerns about the economy, particularly prices and housing. So, while immigration may be a threshold issue for many, pocketbook issues matter, too. Trump has taken note of that, and he’s also leaned into the idea that Latinos who are here legally and eligible to vote came to the U.S. the “right” way.

But incendiary comments by a comedian at a Trump rally at Madison Square Garden, calling Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage,” threaten to hurt Trump in places like Pennsylvania. The Harris campaign has been quick to point to this and other racist rhetoric as part of their argument for Latinos to vote Democratic.

Biden won Latinos in Pennsylvania by the widest margin of any of the swing states — and half of Latinos in the state are of Puerto Rican descent, according to demographer William Frey at the Brookings Institution. Latinos were 5% of the electorate in the state in 2020. That’s not as high as some other key states, but in a very close election, the margins could matter.



6. Watch AAPI margins in Nevada, Georgia and elsewhere.

If Latinos are the largest-growing demographic group, Asian Americans are the fastest. And since 2008, they have voted overwhelmingly for Democrats. They could have the biggest impact in Nevada, where they are more than 9% of the eligible-voter population. They were 5% of the electorate in the state in 2020 and went for Biden by a 64%-35% margin.

They could also be crucial in places like Georgia. The AAPI population in the state has grown by more than 50% since 2010 . While only about 3% of eligible voters in Georgia, there were more than 45,000 first-time AAPI voters in the state in 2020. They voted about 58% for Democrats, a margin of more than 7,000 votes in Democrats’ favor — just from first-time AAPI voters, almost the margin that decided the state.

Loading...

7. Do young voters turn out — and vote for Harris at rates they have for past Democrats?

When Democrats win, young voters turn out. In 2008, 2012 and 2020, Democrats won 60% or more of voters 18 to 29 years old and won. In 2016, just 55% of them voted for Clinton.

Harris has also been lagging with the group in pre-election polling. This is a group that turns out at lower rates than others, and polls have indicated that they are among the least likely to say they are definitely voting in this election.

Loading...

Drilling down into the states, one place to spotlight is North Carolina. If Harris is going to win there, she will need a big margin with young voters. Consider the shift in Democratic support over time for young voters vs. Black voters, for example.

In 2008, Obama won 95% of Black voters, and they were 23% of the electorate. In 2020, Biden won 92% and they were the same share of the electorate, according to exit polls. That’s not a huge difference.

But voters 18-29 years old broke for Obama by almost 50 points compared to just 17 for Biden. They also turned out at a 3 percentage-point-higher share of the electorate in 2008 compared to 2020.



8. Will Harris be the first Democrat in 20 years to win seniors?

Harris could be the first Democrat since former Vice President Al Gore’s bid in 2000 to win voters 65 and older. That’s important, especially in a potentially close election, because seniors and white voters with degrees are among the highest-propensity voters.

She will need them to turn out at high rates to offset Trump’s strength with white, non-college voters.

Loading...

9. Union voters could make a difference in Blue Wall states and Nevada.

Democrats have dominated with union voters over the years. That helped insulate them in the Blue Wall states of Wisconsin and Michigan, which have high concentrations of white, working-class voters.

But union voters are also important in Nevada, where the culinary union is important, and it has a high concentration of working-class Latinos.

Roughly 1 in 5 voters have said they live in a union household over the last two election cycles in those three states, and Biden significantly improved over Clinton’s margins. Clinton lost all three Blue Wall states to Trump in 2016. Trump is threatening to cut into those margins again because of his strength with white voters without degrees.

Something else to keep an eye on, though: Union voters are changing. They’re becoming younger and more white-collar — and not entirely the stereotype of white, male working-class voters of the 1960s.



10. Does Trump turn out rural voters again, and does Harris overperform in the suburbs?

The suburbs have shifted toward Democrats, and Trump has increased Republicans’ advantage in rural areas. Biden won the suburbs narrowly in 2020, and he won the election, as did Obama in 2008.

Obama was close enough in 2012 to win a second term. Clinton, though, fell off in those areas in 2016, and Trump won the election. This time around, pre-election polling has shown Harris doing even better than Biden in the suburbs. That’s likely going to have to hold for her to have a chance of winning.

Loading...

Despite rural voters making up a larger share of the electorate in 2020 than 2016, Biden also cut into Trump’s margins with rural voters, something Harris wants to do again. But if Trump blows out those margins, that could be a major reason why he becomes the 47th president.

Graphics reporter Connie Hanzhang Jin contributed to this report.
In the election home stretch, what are the candidates' closing arguments?

With just two days before voting ends in the 2024 election, both presidential candidates are making their final pitch to voters.

SCOTT DETROW, HOST:

We are going to close the show with the news story hanging over everything - the presidential election that's just two days away. Vice President Harris and former President Donald Trump are campaigning in swing states, fighting for every vote in a neck-and-neck race. NPR's Luke Garrett joins us now for the latest. Hey, Luke.

LUKE GARRETT, BYLINE: Hey, Scott.

DETROW: So let's start with Trump. He was in Pennsylvania this morning. What is Trump's closing argument?

GARRETT: Former President Trump rallied in Lancaster airport in Pennsylvania this morning. In one of his final campaign speeches, Trump focused on claims that this election is being stolen.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

DONALD TRUMP: We got a lot of crooked people out there. We're fighting like a son of a gun. We're fighting. They want to - they are fighting so hard to steal this d*** thing.

GARRETT: Now, without evidence, Trump cast doubt on voting machines, saying they can be hacked. He then cited tech billionaire Elon Musk, who has been spreading election disinformation on his social media platform, X. Later on in his speech, when discussing the possibility of a third assassination attempt, Trump talked about reporters being shot at.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

TRUMP: To get me, somebody would have to shoot through the fake news.

(LAUGHTER)

TRUMP: And I don't mind that so much.

GARRETT: Now, in a quick statement from the Trump campaign, Director of Communications Steven Cheung - he said that Trump wasn't wishing violence on reporters but instead, quote, "looking out for their welfare far more than his own" - end quote.

DETROW: What about Harris? What is her closing message?

GARRETT: Whether it's Harris' comedic cameo on "Saturday Night Live" or her symbolic speech at the Ellipse in Washington, D.C., last week, the overall message remains really clear - turn the page on Trump. But underneath this closing argument, the Harris campaign is using its final hours to really galvanize key voting blocs. Today, for the fourth Sunday in a row, Harris spoke to a Black church in a swing state. Here's Harris with a congregation in Detroit, Michigan.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

VICE PRESIDENT KAMALA HARRIS: And in these next two days, we will be tested. These days will demand everything we've got.

GARRETT: And tonight, Harris rallies with Michigan State University students in East Lansing, Michigan. Young and Black voters, in particular, hold the keys to a Harris win, according to top members of her campaign.

DETROW: So it's a close race. Tens of millions of people have already voted. What are the candidates doing with the remaining hours looking ahead?

GARRETT: So both candidates are really focusing on messages that their bases like in hopes of squeezing out every last vote in an election that could come down to tens of thousands of votes in a handful of states.

DETROW: That is NPR's Luke Garrett. Thanks so much.

GARRETT: Thank you.

Copyright © 2024 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by an NPR contractor. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.
A panel of Donald Trump-appointed judges issued a ruling Oct. 25 that an election law expert called “bonkers.” The appellate judges said that a Mississippi law counting ballots postmarked by Election Day but arriving afterward violated federal law.

The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals panel didn’t put the ruling into immediate effect for this election; it sent the case back to a lower court for further proceedings. But whatever comes of the decision, it carries a lesson heading into Election Day: The courts are on the ballot.

During his presidency, Trump appointed more than 200 federal judges, including half the high court’s six-justice Republican-appointed majority: Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett. Among the other judges he appointed are the ones who issued that Mississippi ruling: Andrew Oldham, James Ho and Kyle Duncan. They’ve all been floated as possible Supreme Court picks for the Republican nominee.

So if, heading into Election Day 2024, you’re thinking about how this Supreme Court would handle a case like the Mississippi one, imagine if, heading into Election Day 2028 or 2032, the next justices are the judges who handed down that ruling.

The two oldest justices are Clarence Thomas, 76, and Samuel Alito, 74. Chief Justice John Roberts is 69, while Democratic appointees Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan are 70 and 64, respectively. All three Trump justices as well as President Joe Biden’s lone pick, Ketanji Brown Jackson, are in their 50s.

The Senate is therefore important, too. Democrats hold precarious control by a 51-49 margin. Even if Kamala Harris keeps the White House in Democratic control, we don’t have to wonder how a Republican-controlled Senate would act during her administration. Look what happened when then-President Barack Obama nominated the mild-mannered Merrick Garland to fill the late Antonin Scalia’s seat. Republicans wouldn’t even give Garland a hearing. That left Scalia's seat open for Republicans to install Gorsuch, who, along with Kavanaugh, Barrett, Thomas and Alito, was in the five-justice majority that went on to overturn Roe v. Wade.

How such issues are decided at the high court in the future could effectively be decided Tuesday.

Subscribe to the Deadline: Legal Newsletter for expert analysis on the top legal stories of the week, including updates from the Supreme Court and developments in Donald Trump’s legal cases.
While we can’t be certain who will win the presidential election, we can predict one thing with a high degree of confidence: Donald Trump will claim he won. And he’ll probably do this on Tuesday night. I want to lay out why it’s important not to jump to conclusions about who is winning, and instead prepare for the vote counting to take a few days — at least.

In 2020, it took four days after the polls closed for the race to be called for Joe Biden. This was a slower count than usual, and for good reason: Many states had expanded their use of early and absentee voting due to the pandemic, and it can simply take longer to count all those ballots. On top of that, voter turnout was unusually high — 158 million people voted, nearly 22 million more than had voted four years earlier.

One of the patterns we’ve seen in recent elections will likely occur this year as well.

It’s unlikely that the vote counting will take quite as long this time. States have become more efficient at counting early and absentee ballots, and a number of states have scaled back the accessibility of such votes. Also, simply because Covid is no longer as much of a threat, more people are voting in person this year.But one of the patterns we’ve seen in recent elections will likely occur this year as well: the “blue shift” (or “red mirage”). In many states, in-person votes get counted before early and absentee ballots do. Thanks in part to Trump’s disparaging of mail-in voting in recent years, Democrats are more likely to cast an early vote than Republicans are.

What this means is that the first results reported on Tuesday evening are likely to trend a bit Republican, then swing toward the Democrats as the mail-in ballots are totaled. Now, that doesn’t matter for the final count, but it could affect how the media covers the counting. As he did in 2020, Trump will use the early Republican-leaning vote count to try to claim that he has won and that later votes coming in for Harris are signs of malfeasance. This is definitely not true! But it will likely be the basis of lawsuits he files. He is already claiming fraud and the election hasn’t even happened yet.

Now, there’s no guarantee this will go on for very long. Right now, the polls suggest that the swing states are basically tied. It’s pretty likely that the polls are off by 1 or 2 points — this is historically pretty normal — and they’ll probably be off in the same direction across different states. Which means there’s a plausible chance that either Harris or Trump will win most or all of the swing states. If it looks like it’s heading that way on Tuesday night, we might not need many days to figure this out. We could even wake up the next morning with a new president-elect.But chances are we’re going to be focusing on a handful of states overnight Tuesday. I want to mention four that are likely to be both close and slow:

Pennsylvania is the big prize this year. Its 19 Electoral Votes make it very likely that whoever wins the state will become president. But under state laws, election workers will not process any ballots — including the early and mail votes — until the polls close at 8:00 p.m. ET. Given how close the election appears right now, it could take a day or two to call the state.

Arizona, with 11 electoral votes, has an unusually long ballot this year, which could delay vote counts. And the mail-in ballots received on Election Day won’t be tabulated until after the polls close that evening. Once the state starts counting it tends to move pretty quickly, but most outlets did not call the state in 2020 until more than a week after the election, so it may be hard to call it on Tuesday night.

Michigan, with 15 electoral votes, could also take a while. The state spans two time zones, with the Upper Peninsula not closing its polls until 9:00 p.m. ET.

Nevada, with six electoral votes, took several days to be called in 2020, and a new law allows ballots postmarked by Election Day to be counted if they’re received up to four days after the election is over. Again, if the election is very close, this state could be tough to call.

As we watch the votes get tallied, it will be useful to observe how voting patterns differ from four years ago. That and exit polls can give us an idea of how things are going to develop as the counting goes on.But chances are, we’ll just need to be patient. Yes, we’ll want to know quickly, and yes, Trump will try to exploit the uncertainty for his own ends. But it’s really just a matter of counting the votes. And the time that it takes to finish the task is evidence that the counters are taking their job seriously.
By heeding the siren song of third-party candidates or staying home on Election Day, Arab and Muslim Americans would be repeating a historic blunder.

In 2000, we were angry and alienated. Sanctions and bombing against Iraq, and the use of “secret evidence” to deport Arab immigrants, marred Bill Clinton’s presidency. But then as now, Palestinian suffering especially inflamed us.

At the Camp David Summit in July 2000, Clinton failed to secure an agreement realizing the goal of Palestinian statehood implicit in the 1993 Oslo accords. Worse, by Election Day that year, the second intifada against Israeli occupation was well underway, causing overwhelming and disproportionate Palestinian civilian casualties.

Anger is blinding many to the overwhelming dangers posed by former President Donald Trump.

Many Arab and Muslim Americans expressed their discontent with the Clinton administration, which they had once strongly supported, by abandoning its vice president, Al Gore, who ran as the Democratic presidential nominee in 2000. Some, especially in the American Muslim community, voted for George W. Bush, who condemned secret evidence. Others stayed home. And many liberals such as myself voted for Ralph Nader, an Arab American icon. Our defections from the Democrats were misguided: Al Gore lost one of the closest elections in U.S. history, and the disastrous 2003 invasion of Iraq was a direct consequence.

Today, opposition in my community to Vice President Kamala Harris stems mainly from the Biden administration’s support for Israel’s brutal war of vengeance in Gaza. Anger is blinding many to the overwhelming dangers posed by former President Donald Trump, and to the fact that Harris would govern better — or at least not as harmfully — on every issue we care about most.

Unable to stomach either candidate, many Arab Americans may stay home or vote for Green Party candidate Jill Stein — choices that could potentially sway the result, particularly in the state of Michigan. But anything other than a vote for Harris will be, in effect, a vote for Trump. There are over 300,000 Arab Americans in Michigan. President Joe Biden won there in 2020 by about half that, just over 150,000 votes. Arab and Muslim Americans will also be a significant factor in Pennsylvania, Georgia and elsewhere. With the election so close, every voter and nonvoter will most likely contribute to the outcome.

Many in our community have the same concerns as a quarter century ago. We don’t want to be taken for granted. We want to “punish” Democrats’ excessive support for Israel and register dissent about U.S. complicity in Palestinian suffering. We want a better Middle East policy. We want to cast a vote we can live with.

I said all that in 2000 and embraced the folly of voting for Nader. I still sympathize with the impulse today. But a Trump victory probably won’t teach the Democrats a lesson about taking the community for granted or the dangers of excessive support for Israel. Instead, it will almost certainly constitute another devastating self-inflicted blow against our own interests and priorities.

There isn’t a single major issue for us on which Harris’ stated positions aren’t markedly preferable. Take immigration: One of Trump’s first steps after his inauguration in 2017 was his “Muslim ban,” prohibiting entry into the United States by nationals of seven Muslim-majority countries. While that hideously discriminatory policy was reversed by Biden, Trump vows to reinstate it. Syrian, Yemeni, Sudanese and Afghan immigrants are likely to lose their temporary protected status or “humanitarian parole” and face Trump’s promised “bloody” mass deportations.

Trump’s deeply held and draconian attitudes toward law enforcement and civil liberties also bode extremely poorly for us.

A major Trump-inspired threat to Arab and Muslim American civil liberties is already underway. Republicans are pursuing legislation to punish universities that don’t sufficiently silence pro-Palestinian protests by stripping them of federal support and, eventually, even accreditation. Trump reportedly told donors, according to The Washington Post, that he would deport pro-Palestinian protesters, who he said were part of a “radical revolution” that has to be “stopped now.” He reportedly promised that if re-elected, he would “set that movement back 25 or 30 years.”

The Biden administration’s policies on Gaza have been indefensible. But Harris has been the most outspoken senior official about the need for a cease-fire and the suffering of Palestinian civilians. And she has been categorical about the necessity of establishing a Palestinian state, which would help pave the path for an end to Israel’s occupation.

Trump, by contrast, has expressed only doubt about the practicality of Palestinian statehood and actively worked to prevent it as president. In January 2020, he issued a “peace plan” that invited Israel to annex an additional 30% of the occupied West Bank, including the Jordan Valley, which would leave any Palestinian entity entirely surrounded by a greater Israel. Trump moved the U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, recognized Israel’s sovereignty in that city and approved Israel’s annexation of the occupied Golan Heights from Syria.

For all their faults, it’s impossible to imagine Harris or Biden doing any of that. And any notion that Trump would have been more sympathetic to Palestinians, or restraining of Israel, after Hamas’ Oct. 7 attacks or the subsequent Gaza war can only reflect a serious misunderstanding of his basic attitudes. This is a man who has repeatedly deployed the word “Palestinian” as if it were a damning slur against his opponents.

Although the U.S. census historically and currently designates people with origins in the Middle East and North Africa, along with Europe, as “white,” Trump and his MAGA movement don’t pretend to consider us “real Americans,” at least not the ones they purport to represent. To them, we are the “enemy within.”

The idea that things couldn’t get worse is remarkably naïve. They certainly could, especially for Palestinians. And helping to re-elect — even through inaction — a president who is on record endorsing Israeli annexation of much of the remaining West Bank would be a major step in that direction.

Anger, however justified, is not a political strategy. Arab and Muslim Americans need to face the stark reality that, like everyone, we have a binary choice on Nov. 5. There is an understandable desire to demonstrate our outrage by withholding support from Harris, but, however emotionally satisfying, that would come at the expense of our clear shared interests, including securing Palestinian rights.

An experiment in American fascism, which is Trump’s undisguised agenda, cannot be a reasonable corrective to any grievance — not even the unspeakable carnage in Gaza. Arab and Muslim Americans must vote with our heads, not our hearts, and help elect the imperfect but demonstrably and clearly preferable Kamala Harris.
The 2024 contest has been one of the most dramatic in history. In the summer, gaffe-prone President Joe Biden stumbled and lost his way disastrously during his TV debate against Trump and eventually withdrew, with only a little over three months left before election day.

Harris then took over the Democratic nomination — but not before Trump was shot in an attempted assassination, avoiding death by the narrowest of margins. A second alleged attempt on Trump’s life followed two months later.

With the polls deadlocked, and claims of misconduct and even Russian interference growing, both sides are preparing for a ferocious legal battle in the days and weeks after the vote. Here is our guide to what is shaping up to be a bumpy ride.

How does the election work?

Every American voter gets to cast a vote for president, but the result is not decided by who wins the most supporters across the country. Instead, each one of America’s 50 states and Washington, D.C., holds its own contest. These state-level ballots feed their results into the national system called the “Electoral College,” and it is here where the outcome is decided.

Every state has a set number of Electoral College votes and, with a couple of exceptions, the candidate winning a popular majority of votes in each state then gets assigned all that state’s Electoral College votes. So if Trump wins the most votes in Pennsylvania, for example, he takes all of the state’s 19 Electoral College votes.

There are 538 Electoral College votes in total. The candidate who wins a majority of these votes — 270 or more — is elected president.
Ever since Barack Obama left office in 2017, being American has felt a bit like living inside of a pinball machine: We’ve been flying between extremes, pinging off edges, rolling toward what feels like end times and then shooting back into the game.

Stroll down memory lane with me: The promise of the first woman president crashed into the shock of reactionary Trumpism, which itself was met with defiant resistance—Black Lives Matter, #MeToo, the Women’s March—each of which was in turn the subject of furious backlash. In the midst of a badly destabilizing pandemic and a chaotic Trump administration, and the lesson that running a woman after a Black man made entire segments of the country lose their collective minds, Americans elected Joe Biden: A moderate, predictable white guy. In response, Trump superfans rioted their way into the Capitol building, Trump’s vice president was threatened with lynching while much of Congress hid from the mob in fear for their lives, and then Republicans largely coalesced around Trump and his stolen-election lies.

Four years later, Donald Trump is running yet again, this time against Kamala Harris, who, despite being a groundbreaking candidate, has not led with her race or gender. And somehow this election is still a nail-biter, so close that even the usually confident numbers guys are saying it’s a coin toss. I’m an American living abroad, which means I’m often asked to explain to people outside of the U.S. how this election remains so close; the problem is, even when I’m back home or speaking with American friends, we’re all flummoxed: This guy might win again?

Advertisement

One thing, I believe, continues to explain the push-pull of Trump’s appeal: Fairness (and, often, a perceived lack thereof). Americans are a fairness-obsessed people, and no candidate in recent years has been as effective at pushing the it’s-not-fair button as Trump. No candidate has so completely perverted the concept of fairness, either. We can only hope that he has finally overplayed that same hand—but we’ll find out for sure on (or after) Tuesday.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As the campaign cycle nears the end, Trump has retreated to the far corners of his worst impulses: fearmongering, conspiracy-theorizing, self-pitying. His replaying of these greatest hits is good news for Democrats: Trump the Bigot may play well at a hardcore MAGA rally, but it turns off more voters than it draws in. Harris’ promise that she’ll be a president for everyone and a champion of individual freedom is far superior messaging. But much of what voters will be weighing when they head to the polls is which candidate they believe will give them and their loved ones a fair shake.

Advertisement

A strong sense of fairness has animated America’s most successful social movements. Americans love the concept of equality under the law: That’s part of why the cases made by the Civil Rights Movement, the feminist movement, and the movement for same-sex marriage were so successful, even if these movements remain unfinished; it’s why programs like affirmative action have long been controversial, and why equality between groups with real biological differences—men and women—has been particularly hard to legislate and enforce. Americans don’t always assess “fairness” the same way. But the concept perpetually shapes Americans’ political preferences—and while both parties lay claim to it, both have managed to lose support when they’ve exceeded the public’s definition of what’s fair and what’s not.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Take immigration. The resonance of Trump’s harsh anti-immigrant rhetoric has shocked and appalled many Americans, myself included. In response to the Trumpian cruelty of the border wall, family separation, and threats of mass deportation, many liberals (Joe Biden included) moved left on immigration, and Biden had many Americans behind him: Trump’s words and actions felt both inhumane and unfair. But that liberalizing impulse has now been significantly scaled back. While unlawful border crossings are now down, they really did spike during the Biden administration; large numbers of immigrants reeling from economic collapse in Venezuela, violence in Central America, and instability worldwide came not just into border states but into cities and towns across the U.S., and even true-blue metropolises felt overwhelmed by a flood of newcomers with few in-country connections and fewer means. This has pushed even many reliably Democratic voters to the edge of their empathy, because it simply feels unfair: Housing, health care, and social supports are in short supply, there are long waitlists of people seeking to come to the U.S. through legal means, and we’re offering our limited resources to people who have jumped the line?

Advertisement

Advertisement

Much of Trump’s case against immigrants is just flat-out racism and xenophobia—there’s no other explanation for assertions like Stephen Miller’s chant of “America is for Americans and Americans only.” But Democrats have shifted right on immigration too, because voters have demanded it—not universally out of racism, but partly out of a sense that the system is being abused.

Advertisement

Advertisement

The Trump campaign has tried a similar tack to secure the suburban female voters they’ve been hemorrhaging since the Dobbs abortion decision. Their “this isn’t fair” case for those voters focuses on trans rights, and specifically, the supposed unfairness of transgender girls playing on girls’ sports teams. On its face, this is an odd issue to latch onto, given that it directly affects just a teeny-tiny number of Americans and, in the grand scheme of things, is pretty low-stakes. But the concept itself feels unfair to a majority of voters, including half of Democrats.

Advertisement

Luckily for Democrats, Trump and his GOP are masterful at overplaying any advantage they may gain in the “fairness” stakes. Conservatives never stick to the limits of what’s fair; they quickly segue into a politics of entitlement, resentment, and control, carried out with enthusiastic cruelty and intentional maliciousness. We see this in Trump’s rhetoric around immigrants and trans people and minorities; we see it in the GOP’s abortion bans. Because the real MAGA goal is not a fair playing field or fair systems; it’s an imbalance that favors white men. Trump’s impulses are not toward fairness; they’re to securing his own power. All of this severely weakens any GOP claim to leveling the playing field. That’s why voters outside of Trump’s core base tend to be repelled by it when they see it.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

But Democrats have their own fairness problems. The Trump era brought with it important movements against police violence and male sexual impunity, both efforts to correct centuries-old wrongs. With the Black Lives Matter protests came important if limited changes to policing and prosecutions in various states and cities, including decreased penalties for some minor crimes, an end to cash bail, and greater awareness of racism in policing and society more broadly. With the #MeToo movement came laws better regulating nondisclosure agreements, temporary windows for victims to file old sex abuse lawsuits, and broader recognition of how some men use their power to harass, manipulate, and abuse women and girls. But both movements also saw some overreach. “Defund the police” was a much-used and quickly unpopular slogan that is now (in my opinion unfairly) tied to the perception that cities are more disorderly and crime-ridden than they were before BLM. Progressives didn’t exactly help themselves here, often simply denying that violations like shoplifting or turnstile-jumping were problems. While it’s true that those acts are minor, allowing them to occur en masse and without penalty touches the fairness nerve: “How is it fair that I pay my subway fare and I purchase my own deodorant when scores of others do not, and are not seeing any punishment?”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related From Slate Three Trump Judges Just Issued a Shock Ruling That Could Wreak Havoc on the Election Read More

In this same period, the language of privilege and power moved from the academy to the progressive workplace to the mainstream. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) programs suddenly seemed to be everywhere in reaction to #MeToo and BLM, and this seemed like a good thing: Finally, Americans were talking a touch more honestly about racism and sexism. But within a few years, much of the public was turning on DEI, frustrated by the sense that these programs created simplistic villains and victims and essentialized people on the basis of their race and gender. What once felt groundbreaking and educational began to feel like a power play—but perhaps most problematically, it began to feel unfair.

Advertisement

The Harris campaign has gone to great lengths to recalibrate. Harris has emphasized her aim to be a president for everyone, downplaying the historic nature of her campaign. And Democrats, even with some historic excesses, really are the people who are trying to make life in America better and fairer for all, rather than putting a thumb on the scale for a long-favored minority group (white men).

Advertisement

The most devastating component of Trumpism has been to manipulate faith in our most basic systems of democracy. Trump, and especially the savvy people around him, surely understand that the 2020 election was not actually rigged, and that the 2024 election won’t be either. But they have exploited that American commitment to fair play—a commitment that extends to American systems. It is a long-held American value that we may not always like a particular outcome, but if the process and the system were both fair, then we accept it. And so, to undermine our faith in the vote, Trump and his allies have not complained about the outcome but about the fairness of the process (even without evidence). Today, scores of Trump supporters, some of them in positions to influence the election outcome, are convinced that there are widespread efforts underway to illegally throw the election to Harris. And Trump has made clear that if he loses, no matter the context or the facts on the ground, he will claim that the election was stolen.

Advertisement

Advertisement

It is a cliché to say that a person’s biggest strengths are also often their most vulnerable weaknesses, but the same may be true for a country. The U.S. has never been a fair or equal place, but throughout our history, there have been people and mass movements that have fought to make it so. There have been counterforces and backlashes and overcorrections, and then forward motion again—usually when the public is convinced that a change is only fair. Many, of course, have labored to maintain inequality and to keep unfairness working in their favor. But the fundamental ideal that things should be fair has animated activists on both sides of the political aisle (if disproportionately on the left). Trump is not the first politician to exploit that admirable aim. But he is the first in the modern era to so avidly try to deform the desire for fairness into the destruction of American democracy—and to have an entire party apparatus behind him.
An election expert's guidance on when to expect results after polls close on Tuesday

NPR's Ayesha Rascoe asks Derek Tisler, an expert on election administration and security at the Brennan Center for Justice, when to expect results after the polls close on Tuesday.

AYESHA RASCOE, HOST:

If the polls are right, this election is going to be a close one, especially in some key swing states. So what can we expect in terms of timing and vote tallies come Tuesday? Derek Tisler is an expert on election administration and security at the Brennan Center for Justice, which advocates for expanded voting rights. Welcome to the program.

DEREK TISLER: Thanks so much for having me on.

RASCOE: So last presidential election, it took about four days after the polls closed for President Biden to be declared the winner. What can we expect this time around?

TISLER: I think voters should expect a similar timeline to what we saw in 2020. And if the margin is really, really close - you know, fewer than 1,000 ballots in some key states - it could take weeks before we actually know who won the presidential election.

RASCOE: Have any of the swing states gotten more efficient in the way that they process ballots?

TISLER: So when we talk about processing ballots, we're talking about mail votes. And mail votes take longer to count because there are all these steps that election workers need to perform before they're actually able to count those ballots. They need to confirm the voter's identity, their eligibility, everything that you need to do before it can be inserted into a scanner and then counted.

Pennsylvania and Wisconsin - they were not able to do this processing before Election Day in 2020, and that is once again going to be the case in 2024. The state that we've seen the biggest change is Michigan. In 2020, Michigan was just like Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. Since then, they passed a new law, and that means that election workers - they are able to preprocess those mail ballots. And it means we're going to see results from mail votes a lot sooner than we did four years ago.

RASCOE: Last election, we saw in some states, I think most sharply in Pennsylvania, what some people called a mirage, which is, you know, a seemingly sudden shift in who's leading one state once mail ballots began getting counted. Can you remind us of why that happened?

TISLER: The votes have already been cast at the end of Election Day. They are what they are. So when we talk about one candidate leading at one point, one candidate trailing, it's not actually true. We're just seeing the ballots revealed in a different order. We know that rural areas, smaller counties are more Republican. We know that large urban counties are more Democrat. We also know that smaller counties can report their votes faster because there are fewer ballots to count. Part of that is going to play into a higher share of Republican votes being released early and a higher share of Democratic votes being released later.

The second thing is in voting method. So we saw, especially in 2020, Democrats were a lot more likely to vote by mail, and Republicans were a lot more likely to vote in person on election day. In states where they can't begin processing those mail ballots early, they are going to release the ballots cast in person first, and then they are going to report results from mail ballots. There is no reason to think there is anything nefarious going on here. Again, it's just revealing the votes in a different order.

RASCOE: Do you have concerns about what could happen during that time? -because where there's a lack of information, people can kind of take advantage of that.

TISLER: Yeah, we saw this in 2020. We saw that there is a high risk of false information spreading in this period of time from when voters are done casting their ballots to when we know who won the election. And it's because everyone is really desperate to learn anything more about something that they are deeply passionate about But the problem is until those votes are actually counted, there's really no new information to provide to these people. And we see that bad actors seek to fill this information vacuum by pushing false claims. I encourage everyone to have patience. And again, understand the reason we're waiting for results is because election processes are designed to prioritize accuracy and security.

RASCOE: Derek Tisler, counsel at the Brennan Center's elections and government program. Thank you so much for being with us.

TISLER: Of course. Thank you.

Copyright © 2024 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by an NPR contractor. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.
Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump speaks during a campaign rally in Lititz, Pa., Sunday, Nov. 3, 2024. (AP Photo/Matt Rourke) via Associated Press

LITITZ, Pa. (AP) — Donald Trump gave a profane and conspiracy-laden speech two days before the presidential election, talking about reporters being shot and suggesting he “shouldn’t have left” the White House after his 2020 loss to Democrat Joe Biden.

In remarks Sunday that bore no resemblance to his standard speech in the campaign’s closing stretch, the former president repeatedly cast doubt on the integrity of the vote and resurrected old grievances about being prosecuted after trying to overturn his defeat four years ago. Trump intensified his verbal attacks against a “grossly incompetent” national leadership and the American media, steering his Pennsylvania rally at one point on to the topic of violence against members of the press.

Advertisement

The GOP nominee for the White House noted the ballistic glass placed in front of him at events after a gunman’s assassination attempt in July at a rally in Butler, Pennsylvania, and Trump talked about places where he saw openings in that protection.

“I have this piece of glass here,” he said. “But all we have really over here is the fake news. And to get me, somebody would have to shoot through the fake news. And I don’t mind that so much.”

It was the second time in recent days that Trump has talked about guns being pointed at people he considers enemies after he suggested former Rep. Liz Cheney, a prominent Republican critic, wouldn’t be willing to support foreign wars if she had “nine barrels shooting at her.”

His remarks also reflect that with less than 48 hours before Election Day, Trump continues to promote falsehoods about elections and argue that he can only lose to Democrat Kamala Harris if he is cheated, even though polls suggest a tight race.

Advertisement

Some of his allies, notably former chief strategist Steve Bannon, have encouraged him to prematurely declare victory on Tuesday even if the race is too early to call. That’s what Trump did four years ago, kicking off a process of fighting the election results that culminated in the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the U.S. Capitol.

His campaign later sought to clarify his meaning in talking about the media.

“President Trump was brilliantly talking about the two assassination attempts on his own life, including one that came within 1/4 of an inch from killing him, something that the Media constantly talks and jokes about,” campaign spokesperson Steven Cheung said in a statement. “The President’s statement about protective glass placement has nothing to do with the Media being harmed, or anything else.”

Harris, meanwhile, told a Michigan church congregation on Sunday that God offers America a “divine plan strong enough to heal division,”

The two major candidates offered starkly different tones with the campaign almost at an end, as Harris said voters can reject “chaos, fear and hate.”

She was concentrating on Michigan, beginning the day with a few hundred parishioners at Detroit’s Greater Emmanuel Institutional Church of God in Christ. It marked the fourth consecutive Sunday that Harris, who is Baptist, has spoken to a Black congregation, a reflection of how critical Black voters are across multiple battleground states.

Advertisement

“I see faith in action in remarkable ways,” she said in remarks that quoted the Old Testament prophet Jeremiah. “I see a nation determined to turn the page on hate and division and chart a new way forward. As I travel, I see Americans from so-called red states and so-called blue states who are ready to bend the arc of history toward justice.”

She never mentioned Trump, though she’s certain to return to her more conventional partisan speech in stops later Sunday. But Harris did tell her friendly audience that “there are those who seek to deepen division, sow hate, spread fear and cause chaos.” The election and “this moment in our nation,” she continued, “has to be about so much more than partisan politics. It must be about the good work we can do together.”

Harris finished her remarks in about 11 minutes — starting and ending during Trump’s roughly 90-minute speech at a chilly outdoor rally in Pennsylvania.

Trump usually veers from subject to subject, a discursive style he has labeled “the weave.” But outside the Lancaster airport, he went on long tangents and hardly mentioned his usual points on the economy, immigration and rote criticisms of Harris.

Trump also referred to John Bolton, his former national security adviser and now a strident critic, as a “dumb son of a b—.” And he repeated familiar and debunked theories about voter fraud, alleging that Democrats could only win by cheating. Public polls indicate a tight and competitive race across the battleground states that will determine the Electoral College outcome.

Advertisement

“It’s a crooked country,” Trump said. “And we’re going to make it straight. We’re going to make it straight.”

Harris pushed back at Trump’s characterizations of U.S. elections, telling reporters after the church service that Trump’s comments are “meant to distract from the fact that we have and support free and fair elections in our country.” Those “good systems” were in place in 2020, Harris said, and “he lost.”

The vice president said she trusts the upcoming vote tally and urged voters, “in particular people who have not yet voted to not fall for this tactic, which I think includes, suggesting to people that if they vote, their vote won’t matter.”

Separately, the vice president tacitly acknowledged the significant population of Arab Americans in Michigan, and that community’s voters who are angry at the Biden administration for its continuation of the U.S. alliance with Israel amid the Netanyahu government’s war against Hamas in Gaza.

“I have been very clear that the level of death of innocent Palestinians is unconscionable,” Harris told reporters Sunday after the church service. “We need to end the war, and we need to get the hostages out. And as president of the United States, I will do everything in my power to achieve that end.”

Advertisement

Trump, for his part, acknowledged that he was sidestepping his usual approach with his conspiratorial speech. He repeatedly mentioned how he disregarded the advice of his aides, telling their side of the story in a mocking voice and insisting that he had to talk about election fraud.

Co-campaign manager Susie Wiles, long credited with bringing order to Trump’s often-chaotic political operation, watched the former president silently from off stage.

Trump at one point suggested that he wouldn’t deliver this version of his speech again: “I hope you’ve enjoyed this,” he said, “because I’m only doing this one time.”

___
Spring House, Pennsylvania CNN —

First lady Jill Biden stood at a church roughly 10 miles from the Philadelphia suburb where she grew up Sunday morning, making an urgent plea before several hundred churchgoers, many of whom held fans with a picture of the woman at the top of the Democratic ticket.

“One vote can win an election, and one election can set a new course,” Biden said at one of two morning services at the Bethlehem Baptist Church in Spring House, Pennsylvania. “Will you be that person? Will you act now? Will you speak up and use your voice and decide our future? Will you vote?”

The Sunday church stop kicked off a full day of events for the self-described “Philly girl” in the critical battleground of Pennsylvania as she spent the final weekend before Election Day stumping for Vice President Kamala Harris. While her husband, President Joe Biden, has been a scarce presence on the campaign trial, the first lady has been one Biden in demand for the Harris campaign.

Harris’ team has deployed the first lady to all seven battleground states in the last month. By Election Day, she will have appeared at nearly 30 campaign events over a three-week period, including trips to Georgia, Pennsylvania and North Carolina in the closing days of the race.

Speaking at a canvass launch in Savannah, Georgia, on Saturday, Jill Biden told the volunteers there were only days left “to elect a new generation of leaders,” urging them to “meet this moment as if our democracy is on the line because it is.”

Her fall campaign sprint has looked far different than what she imagined earlier this year. The first lady, an ardent protector of the president and her family, was an active campaigner in his reelection bid from start to finish.

She supported her husband as he vowed to stay in the 2024 race after his halting debate performance against former President Donald Trump in late June and was at his side just over three weeks later when he decided to call it quits.

It marked a difficult period for the Biden family, which saw many fellow Democrats publicly and privately push for the 81-year-old president to step aside from the campaign. But the first lady has said she and her husband are “totally at peace” with the decision

“We’ve been in politics over 50years, I think it’s — we’re ready for the new journey,” Biden told ABC News last month. “It was the right call.”

But before that journey outside of politics begins, the first lady is working to get Harris elected. While she’s tailored her speech to stump for a different nominee, much of her argument remains the same. She’s been a fierce critic of the former president, whose return to the White House would also threaten her husband’s legacy.

“Donald Trump wakes up every morning thinking about one person and one person only: himself,” she said at a stop in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, last month. “Another Trump administration would lead to more chaos, more greed, more division.”

First lady Jill Biden speaks during a campaign event for Vice President Kamala Harris and Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz on November 2, 2024 at the Campaign Field Office in Garden City, Georgia. Richard Burkhart/Savannah Morning News/USA Today Network/Imagn Images

She’s also been motivated by the threats Democrats see to abortion rights. The first lady spoke out following the Supreme Court’s 2022 decision ending the constitutional right to an abortion and has frequently blamed Trump, who solidified the court’s conservative majority, for curtailing women’s reproductive freedoms.

“Secrecy, shame, silence, danger, even death,” the first lady said in Phoenix, Arizona, last month as she recounted what women faced before Roe v. Wade. “That was the reality back then, and that’s where Donald Trump has left women today — less safe and less free right now in America.”

“The government shouldn’t be telling women what to do. So let’s elect Kamala Harris and Tim Walz,” she added.

The Harris campaign has deployed the first lady in targeted ways, having her speak in smaller markets like Carson City, Nevada, and Macon, Georgia. The campaign has tapped into some of her personal interests through her campaign events as well, like leading a canvass launch for military families in Fayetteville, North Carolina, and making calls to fellow teachers in West Chester, Pennsylvania.

“You’re just getting home from school. You know I’m a teacher too,” she said over the phone to a teacher named Matt. “Are you going to come and volunteer for us? You know how important this election is.”

The first lady, who still works full time as an English professor, also teamed up on the road with Minnesota first lady Gwen Walz — an educator who could follow in Dr. Biden’s footsteps if she becomes second lady — for campaign events in Michigan and Wisconsin.

“As a teacher, mom, and grandmother, the first lady’s trusted voice is crucial to mobilizing the voters we need to win in this election” said Harris-Walz campaign manager Julie Chavez Rodriguez.

Biden has said she’s developed a close friendship with second gentleman Doug Emhoff, who could make history as the White House’s first first gentleman. She told ABC News the first advice she gave to Emhoff was “just be yourself.”

At a recent campaign stop in Arizona, the first lady said she’s bonded with Harris “over many things,” including both losing their mothers to cancer “long before we were done needing them.” Harris also worked with the Bidens’ late son Beau when they served as state attorneys general together.

The first lady’s experience with loss was front and center as she campaigned in Pennsylvania on Sunday. Speaking before the Baptist congregation, she choked up as she recalled how she lost her faith in 2015, saying her prayer to God went unanswered as Beau passed away from brain cancer.

She said years later she regained that connection to God, and urged the churchgoers to turn their faith into action in the closing hours of the campaign.

“We are called to do justice, love mercy and walk humbly with God,” she said. “Choosing who leads our communities is one way we can live out our faith. So make a plan to get to the polls on Tuesday and help your friends and neighbors and loved ones as well. Because even if it seems small, every single vote counts.”
For the formerly incarcerated, voting for the first time is also about those who can't

toggle caption Wesley Lapointe/for NPR

As he waited for an open voting booth, Craig Muhammad looked down at the unmarked ballot in his hands.

“I did 42 years in prison. Why am I shaking?” he asked, letting out a small laugh.

Muhammad has seen presidents come and go, political sentiments move from right and left and the country become more divided. All he could do was watch.

But after spending more than half of his life in the Maryland prison system, Muhammad came home at the end of September. About a month later, he registered to vote and cast a ballot in the 2024 election.

Sponsor Message

“It went beautiful,” Muhammad said as he walked out of a polling place in downtown Baltimore.

“It wasn’t as hard as I thought it was,” he added. “But God … I’m 64 years old. I voted today for the first time in my life. Wow. I can’t wait to tell my sister.”

toggle caption Wesley Lapointe/for NPR

At his sister’s house, a short drive away, Muhammad described the experience as both emotional and empowering.

“I let out a big sigh — I looked out the corner of my eye … to make sure nobody [had] seen me do it — and then I said, ‘I did it,’” he said. “And I’m going to do it next year and the next four years … I’m going to encourage other people to vote.”

In 25 states, including Maryland, people can vote as soon as they get out of prison. But many others have felony disenfranchisement laws, which partially or completely bar formerly incarcerated people from voting. That patchwork of laws can cause confusion and frustration, leaving some newly released citizens unaware of or unable to exercise their rights.

“The right to vote is going to vary quite a bit across different states in the U.S.,” said Ariel White, a professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “It can be really challenging for people to get accurate information about what the law is and how it might be applied to them.”



Sponsor Message

A ballot in the name of those who cannot vote

When Elizabeth Shatswell, 40, saw an organization registering people to vote on campus at the University of Puget Sound, she had no intention of asking about her eligibility. Instead, she went over because they were giving out bright blue rubber ducks that were emblazoned with the word “VOTE,” and she wanted one.

toggle caption Yehyun Kim/for NPR

“I was like, ‘I have a criminal history. I can't vote. That's not for me. But can I have a duck?’” said Shatswell, who was released from prison last spring after serving 23 years and was finishing her degree.

But on top of giving her two rubber ducks, the organizers also shared that in Washington state formerly incarcerated people can vote.

“I got so excited,” said Shatswell, who is now a correctional education manager at JSTOR, working to increase academic resources in prisons. “I never really thought that that was going to be a privilege or something that I could do.”

“Voting specifically for me is a way to address the fact that I didn't have any autonomy over the decisions in my life for 23 years and that people continue today to not have autonomy over their lives,” she added.

toggle caption Yehyun Kim/for NPR

Though Shatswell was released from prison in Washington, she began her sentence in her home state of Virginia — which largely does not allow formerly incarcerated people with felony convictions to vote.

“I'm carrying all the people that can't vote in my vote,” she said. “And that's an honor.”



Geography dictates voting rights

An estimated 4 million U.S. citizens are unable to cast a ballot, according to a recent report from The Sentencing Project.

It further estimates that 1 in 22 Black Americans of voting age can’t vote, three and a half times that of other Americans.

Johnny Le'Dell Pippins, 55, is one of them. He received clemency from Illinois and was recently released from prison after 27 years. He isn’t allowed to cast a ballot this year.

toggle caption Grace Smith

“I'm part of the process. I put gas in the car, so I get to help decide where we go,” he said. “I should have that inalienable right of every American.”

Sponsor Message

After obtaining his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in prison, Pippins is now studying for a Ph.D. in criminology at the University of Iowa.

If he were back in Illinois, he would be voting in this election, but Iowa partially restricts access for those with past felony convictions.

Pippins said he first started paying closer attention to politics after realizing how disenfranchisement — which he said is “steeped in racism” — has ripple effects.

“Hardly any of these young men who were locked up with me … were interested in voting or had ever voted,” Pippins remembered. “It was because their parents hadn’t voted. They had been disenfranchised. And so, by default, we’re disenfranchising one generation after another.”

Overall, formerly incarcerated people also have relatively low levels of voter turnout, professor White of MIT explained.

"This is a community where you see people often ... expressing lower trust in government," she said.

White also stressed that formerly incarcerated voters are not a politically monolithic group.

toggle caption Grace Smith/Grace Smith

There’s an assumption that justice-involved people will tend to vote Democrat because of their experience being on the receiving end, but that may not always be the case. In an October poll from the Marshall Project<, which surveyed 54,000 people in prisons and jails, “roughly half” supported former President Donald Trump. Notably, the sample had a larger representation of white respondents compared to the overall prison population.

If he could vote, Pippins said he would back Vice President Harris. And while he has stayed politically engaged, he believes being disenfranchised has affected his patriotism.

“[Voting] is your ticket,” he said. “You get to help decide. … And what you have to say that matters. To not have that is, I'm still just a prisoner. I'm a prisoner with a new address.”



"That country that I've always loved ... finally feels like mine"

Across the country in Los Angeles, Kunlyna Tauch, 36, is newly home after being released on Oct. 2.

“Being able to vote for the first time within my first three weeks feels like that country that I always loved, that I always knew was my own — it feels like it's finally mine,” he said.

toggle caption Zaydee Sanchez for NPR

He voted for Harris, even though his experience of the vice president is personal.

Sponsor Message

Tauch originally received a 50-year-to-life sentence as a teenager in 2008. Harris later served as attorney general of California, which overlapped with his appeals process, and Tauch remembers her name on some of his court documents.

Harris has been criticized by Democrats, especially on the left, over her record as a prosecutor and California’s "top cop." But as a self-described progressive, Tauch says that her history doesn’t alter his feelings about the 2024 race.

“I'm voting for her because her values align with mine. I don't care if she's on my paperwork. That was her job. I can see the contention, but the truth is people change,” he said. “I don't think she's as bad as people make her out to be as a prosecutor.”

He’s focused on the down-ballot races and has gotten involved in local politics, canvassing for a state assemblymember in the weeks between his release and the election.

toggle caption Zaydee Sanchez for NPR

It’s an experience he’s since talked about with his father, Kunthir Oum, a naturalized citizen originally from Cambodia. During their conversation, Tauch learned something: His father had never voted before either.

“He literally asked me, ‘Can you help me vote?’” Tauch said.

They worked on the floor and went through the options. Tauch described helping his father research different candidates and propositions on the California ballot.

“I had a proud father moment for my dad. And, you know, he was cheesing the whole time,” he recalled. “Those are the moments that made struggling for 18 years worth it.”

This article was written with Charlotte West, an education reporter covering prisons for Open Campus, a nonprofit newsroom focused on higher education. Sign up for College Inside, her biweekly newsletter on the future of postsecondary education in prisons.
This is a clear and blatant effort to evade the FCC's Equal Time rule.



The purpose of the rule is to avoid exactly this type of biased and partisan conduct - a licensed broadcaster using the public airwaves to exert its influence for one candidate on the eve of an election.… https://t.co/LliZF0po9t
On election night, Vice President Kamala Harris has the potential to make history and become the first woman, and the first woman of color, elected to the country’s highest office. While much has been said about her historic candidacy, down-ballot candidates across the country also have a chance to break barriers on election night.

In Delaware, state Sen. Sarah McBride, a Democrat and the first openly trans state senator in the U.S., could graduate to the U.S. House and become the country’s first openly transgender member of Congress. McBride easily defeated her primary opponents in September, raking in almost 80% of the vote. She is widely considered the favorite in a match-up against Republican John Whalen III, a retired police officer and former construction company owner.

If elected to Delaware’s sole House seat, McBride would replace Rep. Lisa Blunt Rochester, the Democratic nominee for the state’s open U.S. Senate seat.

Blunt Rochester’s campaign also has the potential to make history. In the event that both Blunt Rochester and Angela Alsobrooks, the Democratic Senate nominee in neighboring Maryland, prevail at the ballot box, the next Congress will be the first in which two Black women serve in the Senate at the same time.

Only three Black women have served in the Senate in its 235-year history: Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois in the 1990s; Harris, who represented California before becoming vice president; and Laphonza Butler, who was appointed to represent California by Gov. Gavin Newsom last year to succeed the late Dianne Feinstein.

Should they both win, Blunt Rochester and Alsobrooks would double the number of Black women elected to the Senate to four (because Butler was appointed, not elected, and she's not running for election this year). But to do that, Blunt Rochester must defeat Republican Eric Hansen, a businessman making his first run for public office, which she’s widely expected to do.

Alsobrooks faces a tougher race against the state’s former governor, Larry Hogan, a Republican, although recent polls show her with an edge.

The chance to be the first two Black women to serve in the Senate together hasn’t been lost on them. Blunt Rochester told The Associated Press that she and Alsobrooks already have a private text chain and refer to each other as their “sister senator to be.”

Across the country, in Washington state, another state senator could make history. Democrat Emily Randall has the chance to become the first out LGBTQ+ Latina member of Congress.

Randall entered politics in 2018, flipping a Republican-held seat. Now running in the state's 6th Congressional District, Randall would break a 91-year streak of sending only white men to fill the seat if she wins. And the odds are in her favor, as she is heavily favored to defeat fellow state Sen. Drew MacEwen, a Republican, in the left-leaning district.

Randall recently secured the endorsement of The Seattle Times editorial board. “Her desire to improve health care access and create job pathways, particularly in rural areas of her district, is a worthy endeavor in Congress,” the board wrote.

History is made every time the votes are counted and the results are tallied. Time will tell what history gets made in 2024.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

The closer we get to Election Day, the more the question becomes inescapable: What happens after Election Day?

In the aftermath of the 2020 election, then-President Donald Trump’s quest to hold on to power, first by challenging his loss and then by an ever-increasing pressure campaign on those responsible for confirming the results, culminated in a historic act of political violence: the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the U.S. Capitol. Now, coming up to the finish line of the next presidential election, there are indications that Americans are again worried about the possibility of political violence.

Advertisement

In a Scripps News/Ipsos poll released Oct. 24, 62% of Americans surveyed said that violence related to the election was “somewhat” or “very” likely, with a majority of both Republicans (59%) and Democrats (70%) agreeing that was the case.

There have already been worrying instances of actual violence against people and processes as the election draws near: Ballot boxes have been set on fire in several states, and there have been threats of violence at polling stations. And there have been two apparent assassination attempts against Trump.

U.S. intelligence has also warned about the possibility of violence and unrest. Reports from various news publications revealed that intelligence agencies, including the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security, had sent local law enforcement agencies a number of bulletins warning that domestic “violent” extremists were a threat to the election and its aftermath, with candidates, election workers and others considered targets. The bulletins also warned of violence at polling places, ballot boxes and political events, according to NBC News.

“If there’s a very close election, there are a lot of people who are feeling extremely angry or extremely threatened, and particularly if it’s looking like Trump loses, he has supporters who are likely to engage in a lot of threats and intimidation and possibly some physical violence,” said Rachel Kleinfeld, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a nonpartisan think tank.

Advertisement

The rhetoric that Trump, at least, has used on the campaign trail hasn’t helped. The Republican presidential nominee has said he would prosecute his political enemies and would use the military to quash protests, and he has consistently used violent language when talking about groups he disparages — the migrant “invasion” that is “poisoning the blood” of America, for example.

And perhaps most important, he has already been laying the groundwork to once again question the validity of the election if he loses. Which, in the very likely event of a close election that could takes a few days to determine, could be a hazard.

“The uncertainty is probably the biggest risk factor,” Kleinfeld said. “Obviously, if we get a strong turnout and everybody clearly knows who won, that would be wonderful. But the likelihood is a lot of litigation, dissension and mis- and dis-information.”

The presidential race is uncomfortably close. Polls have Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic nominee, neck and neck, often either in a dead tie or within a percentage point or two of each other. And there are many indications that, barring an (unlikely) early landslide of results, Americans probably won’t know who won until several days after the election.

Insurrectionists loyal to President Donald Trump try to break through a police barrier on Jan. 6, 2021, at the U.S. Capitol while both houses of Congress were meeting to certify the electoral vote. Julio Cortez/Associated Press

Advertisement

In particular, the increased use of mail-in ballots and, to some extent, early voting has created delays in counting ballots in some states that could slow the vote counts. Swing state Pennsylvania, for example, prohibits election officials from opening and beginning to process mail-in ballots until the morning of Election Day. As of Oct. 30, the state had received requests for more than 2 million mail-in and absentee ballots. That’s over 2 million individual, physical ballots that will have to be removed from envelopes, checked for accurate voter information and tallied — work that cannot start until Tuesday morning.

“[It’s] just very unlikely that we’ll know for days, possibly even a week or two,” says Kleinfeld. She also points out that, due to changes to the Presidential Transition Act in 2022, if the results are unclear and neither candidate has conceded by five days after the election, both candidates will be allowed to begin their transition to the Oval Office, “which will make them both look like they’re the legitimate winner to their supporters who aren’t used to seeing that happen,” Kleinfeld noted.

“So I think you’re likely to have a period of real uncertainty with a lot of fear, anger ― and, as a result, you’ll see, probably, armed mobs at the homes and the workplaces of people who those individuals think could make a difference. And you’re likely to see a lot of intimidation against election officials, which we’re already seeing, but it’s likely to go up if there’s people that those individuals think ... they can pressure,” she added.

However, she cautioned that the number of bad actors is fairly low. “The vast majority of Americans, while they are worried about political violence, don’t believe that it’s right, good — that political violence is justified.”

A PRRI survey from early September found that fewer than 1 in 5 Americans agreed with cited measures of political violence, including the statement that “true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country.” And even among those polled by Scripps/Ipsos, the vast majority said that they would accept the election results even if their preferred candidate loses. Only 8% said they were willing to accept violence in order to secure their preferred election outcome.

Advertisement

Kleinfeld noted that simply spreading information and reassuring voters that the election is safe and fair — and straight-up normalizing the fact that we likely won’t know the results for a while — can be an important tool in staving off violence. “It’s certainly a best practice and can really reduce the likelihood of people getting agitated, concerned that something nefarious was happening,” she said.

“None of this is inevitable,” she added. “By making the polls in the post-polling period more joyful and normalizing that when our country is this close, we don’t know on election night the way we used to, the less likely it is to have violence.”

Legal experts have been working hard to affirm public faith in the election. “We’ve seen an assault in two dimensions, in the court of public opinion and in the court of law, and that is the basic structure that we also saw in the 2020 assault on democracy,” Norm Eisen, special counsel to the House Judiciary Committee majority during Trump’s first impeachment trial and an “ethics czar” in the Obama administration, said on a press call organized by the Defend Democracy Project earlier this week. “That is the identical pattern that has commenced in 2024 and that we expect to continue in the post-election process. And part of the reason that we can be confident that the system is strong enough once again to withstand these predations is because that’s what’s happening.”

Eisen cited a number of recent legal decisions that have upheld election security, including the defeats of an attempt to purge voter rolls in Alabama and an attempt to change voting rules in Georgia to make it easier for Trump allies to challenge results.

“The threats will be more severe if the election is close, but the system is tested. Our election officials are ready like never before,” Eisen added.

Advertisement
CNN —

Donald Trump is re-using his 2020 playbook to baselessly claim the 2024 election is being stolen from him and is being joined by allies with big megaphones amplifying his falsehoods ahead of Election Day.

Trump has made repeated false claims that Democrats are cheating in the election, and he’s twisted isolated problems with voting leading up to Election Day, all in an effort to prime his supporters to falsely believe the election is not legitimate if he loses.

This includes saying voting by noncitizens is a widespread problem. He’s claimed there’s no verification for overseas or military ballots. He’s claimed election officials are using early voting to commit fraud. He’s claimed that massive swaths of mail-in ballots are illegitimate, even as he’s encouraged his supporters to use mail voting this time around.

Most importantly, Trump has claimed that the only way Vice President Kamala Harris can win the election is by cheating.

The claims are baseless.

“It’s unfortunate that he sees his path back to the White House as denigrating a basic American institution like elections,” said Ben Ginsberg, a CNN contributor and Republican campaign attorney who has served as general counsel for several previous GOP nominees. “If you’re just starting to pay attention to this, the claims that you’re hearing in 2024 about the election system not being reliable is extraordinarily similar to what he and his supporters were saying in 2020.”

In 2020, Trump lost a close election, and then spent two months trying to overturn the result. In 2024, with polls signaling a razor-thin election in seven battleground states, election officials are bracing for another firehose of misinformation about the result – especially if the election hinges on the results of hundreds of ballots in one or two states.

Election experts say that despite the viral and hyperbolic claims, the vast majority of voters will almost assuredly experience a swift and uneventful experience whenever they vote, whether it’s through early voting, vote-by-mail or on Election Day.

As early voting has gotten underway, many local and state officials are showing they intend to proactively knock down falsehoods about the election that spread like wildfire on social media.

Voter fraud is rare, but when it does happen, it is usually caught thanks to the layers of safeguards built into voting processes, according to nonpartisan election experts.

“It’s really useful to remind people in this time of heightened anxiety, all the way around, that they’re still in charge (to decide the election outcome),” said Justin Levitt, a CNN contributor and election law expert at Loyola Law School who served as a voting rights adviser in the Biden White House.

Video Ad Feedback ‘A real fear that the bottom has started to fall out’: Journalist on recent mood inside Trump campaign 05:58 - Source: CNN

“There’s a ton of noise out there right now. If this election is more than a 537-vote margin in any of the swing states, none of the noise will matter,” Levitt added, referencing the margin in Florida during the disputed 2000 presidential election.

Still, that hasn’t always stopped conspiracy theories from spreading on social media – including from Elon Musk, the CEO of X, who has poured tens of millions of dollars into boosting Trump’s campaign. Election officials warn they’re outmatched and struggling to combat the wave of falsehoods coming from Musk and his platform.

An intense focus on Pennsylvania

Pennsylvania could be the state where the 2024 campaign is decided, and it’s become ground zero for both legal fights over voting rules – and the spread of misinformation.

Trump has already claimed without evidence that his opponents are cheating in the state, both on his social media and at campaign rallies. At a Tuesday rally in Allentown, Pennsylvania, Trump claimed that the discovery of hundreds of suspected fraudulent voter registration applications in Lancaster County was evidence of cheating.

Lancaster election officials and the county district attorney announced last week they received a batch of suspected fraudulent voter registration applications, which had similar handwriting, incorrect information and other problems.

But that is hardly evidence of cheating – and in fact it shows the system worked to flag the applications, thanks to the checks in place to verify voters’ personal information and signatures before any ballots are cast, said Kathy Boockvar, a former Pennsylvania secretary of state.

“All these safeguards make sure that this doesn’t impact voting,” said Boockvar, a Democrat who is now president of Athena Strategies. “What it doesn’t do is it doesn’t actually make it any more likely that there’s going to be any more improper votes, thanks to all those guardrails in place.”

Because the state’s presidential election is so contested, it’s become a tinderbox for claims of fraud to spread like wildfire.

Last month, a conservative activist claimed voter fraud on X, in a post that quickly went viral, because 53 voters were registered at the same address, a Catholic church in Erie County. But it wasn’t voter fraud at all – there are 55 nuns of the Benedictine Sisters of Erie who live there.

Pennsylvania has also been the site of furious pre-election litigation, including over the rules about what mail-in ballots can be counted and how early voting is administered. Trump’s campaign and Republicans successfully sued to have Bucks County extend on-demand mail over complaints that voters had been turned away.

Elon Musk’s misinformation machine

Election experts say that misinformation surrounding a presidential election is nothing new. But what’s changed is the volume of viral claims that they’re trying desperately to keep up with.

Musk’s 2022 acquisition of X, formerly known as Twitter, has only added fuel to the fire, as he has pushed out numerous conspiracies to his 200 million followers on the site, as well as at town halls to support Trump’s candidacy.

Social media has been used in past elections to fuel conspiracies, including by foreign actors in 2016. But X and other social media companies have pivoted away from efforts to combat falsehoods spread on their sites.

Musk’s tactics have pushed election officials to go so far as to try – unsuccessfully – to personally convince him to stop spreading baseless claims that could mislead voters.

In Michigan this past week, Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson tried to push back on a claim Musk shared about registered voters in Michigan, accusing him of “spreading dangerous disinformation.” Musk responded that Benson was “blatantly lying to the public.”

Musk was latching onto claims alleging there were more ballots cast in Michigan’s early voters than there were identified voters, which the secretary of state’s office said was due to a data “formatting error” that was corrected.

While Lara Trump, the co-chair of the Republican National Committee, posted on X that her team had confirmed this issue was due to a glitch, that didn’t stop others in the conservative media ecosystem from continuing to amplify claims of fraud – refusing to back down from claims of a larger conspiracy.

CNN’s Donie O’Sullivan, after spending 24 hours consuming pro-Trump media, reported the pro-Trump outlets are telling their viewers there’s no way the former president can lose, if the election is fair.

Election officials are trying to take a more proactive approach to false claims in their states and municipalities to knock them down quickly – like a false claim in Texas of a man claiming a voting machine had switched his vote.

But that’s often an uphill battle.

“The effect of all this election mis- and dis-information is when you survey people, they don’t believe anything they read online about elections, and that’s a problem when there are really great election officials trying to get information into the hands of voters,” said Ruth Greenwood, director of the election law clinic at Harvard Law School.

Manipulating early voting numbers

In 2020, Trump attacked early voting and mail-in voting, claiming they were used to cheat. His supporters, in response, largely voted on Election Day.

This time, Trump and the RNC have made a big push to use early and mail voting, even as Trump has continued to attack them.

As of five days before Election Day, more than 61 million Americans have already cast their ballots through either mail or early in-person voting. Both Democrats and Republicans have looked for positive signs for their side based on publicly available analysis of data that states report – and partisans have made sweeping predictions from the totals.

Voting and election modeling experts say that trying to game out election results based on early voting data is not statistically sound, because there are gaps in the data and the data only describes people who vote ahead of Election Day, not who they voted for or the intentions of tens of millions who will go to the polls on Tuesday.

The questionable claims about early voting data have stoked fears that the early voting numbers will be one thing that Trump and his allies use to question the election results should Harris prevail. There are also concerns that Trump is preparing to declare victory prematurely – just as he did early in the early morning hours after Election Day in 2020, before anyone had called the race.

Trump claimed he had won because he was ahead, ignoring the fact that the in-person votes, which tended to be more Republican-leaning, had been counted ahead of mail-in ballots, which leaned more Democratic.

While Republicans have embraced mail voting this year and there’s no pandemic pushing millions to vote that way, a similar phenomenon could still happen this election.

“If the trend from recent past elections continues, if Democrats are more likely to use vote-by-mail or absentee ballots and those ballots take longer to cast, then you’re going to see results shifting from Republican candidates being ahead to Democratic candidates pulling closer to them and potentially even surpassing them,” said Michael Morley, an election law professor at Florida State University College of Law. “Not because of fraud or something underhanded or nefarious going on, but because more ballots are being counted.”

Baseless claims of rampant non-citizen voting

Trump and his Republican allies have ramped up litigation as well as their rhetoric ahead of Election Day over the threat of noncitizens voting – and Trump in particular has claimed without evidence that Democrats are trying to allow non-citizens to vote.

“Our elections are bad, and a lot of these illegal immigrants coming in, they’re trying to get them to vote,” Trump said at the September presidential debate. “They can’t even speak English. They don’t even know what country they’re in practically. And these people are trying to get them to vote.”

Republicans have sought ahead of the election to purge voter rolls of suspected noncitizens. The Supreme Court sided with Virginia Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin on Wednesday, allowing the state to continue with a program that state officials say is aimed at removing suspected noncitizens from the voter rolls.

Voting rights groups have pointed to evidence that Virginia’s voter purge effort also caught up citizens who are eligible to vote.

The Justice Department also sued Alabama this fall over the state’s effort to remove more than 3,000 names from its voter rolls, arguing it violated federal law against such an action taking place too close to an election.

Experts say illegal voting by non-citizens is extremely rare, and when it does happen, it is usually caught quickly. A recent Georgia audit of the 8.2 million people on its rolls found just 20 registered noncitizens – only nine of whom had voted.

And Michigan earlier this week charged a Chinese citizen with voter fraud and perjury after he allegedly cast a ballot for the 2024 election, which experts say shows how rare instances of illicit voting are uncovered.

The focus on noncitizen voting has led to false allegations against Americans, too. In Pennsylvania’s Allegheny County, election officials issued a statement Wednesday debunking a viral video alleging non-citizens cut the line and were allowed to vote at an early voting site. In fact, the video showed a group of registered voters who needed the assistance of translators, according to a county spokesperson.

Republican litigation has also targeted overseas ballots cast by Americans living abroad and military service members. Trump falsely claimed that Democrats were trying to cheat with overseas ballots.

“The Democrats are talking about how they’re working so hard to get millions of votes from Americans living overseas. Actually, they are getting ready to CHEAT!” he wrote on Truth Social in September.

But courts in multiple jurisdictions have rejected Republican challenges to the procedures for vetting overseas ballots and to set aside ballots for additional checks of voters’ eligibility.

Fears of another attempt to challenge the result

Since the chaos in the aftermath of the 2020 election, officials have spent the past four years preparing both for increased threats of violence and efforts to block the certification of a legitimate election result.

Election officials have been inundated with threats of violence since the 2020 election. They’ve responded in 2024 by stepping up efforts to protect polling places and their workers on Election Day, including with bulletproof glass, wearable panic buttons and open lines of communication with local law enforcement.

Last month, the FBI and Department of Homeland Security warned that “election-related grievances” could motivate domestic extremists to engage in violence before and after the November election.

Ballots and drop boxes have been targeted already. Authorities are investigating fires at ballot boxes in Portland, Oregon, and Vancouver, Washington, where hundreds of ballots were destroyed or damaged.

Once all the votes are cast, election officials and experts are preparing to try to stop a repeat of the 2020 election, where Trump sought out multiple avenues to try to overturn his election loss, culminating in his supporters rioting at the US Capitol on January 6, 2021.

Election officials and experts say they hope to avoid a repeat of 2020, where if Trump loses the election, he and his allies make baseless claims that the other side cheated and the result is illegitimate.

There have been steps taken to blunt any attempt to of a 2020 repeat: Congress, for instance, updated the Electoral Count Act, the law that governs the January 6 congressional certification of the presidential election, in an attempt to make it harder to block certification.

But Trump and his allies have been laying the groundwork to try to dispute the election should he lose.

The “Stop the Steal” movement has already reemerged before Election Day, and many of those activists have been telling their supporters that the only way Trump can lose in 2024 is through fraud.

In Georgia, conservatives sought to allow county election officials to refuse to certify the election results, though the effort was blocked by a state judge.

Another Trump ally, Maryland GOP Rep. Andy Harris, suggested last week that North Carolina’s GOP-controlled state legislature could award the state’s electoral votes to Trump before votes are even counted, arguing there was possible disenfranchisement of voters in western North Carolina due to complications from Hurricane Helene.

If Trump believes there is systemic fraud in the election, he will have the opportunity to prove it in the courts, just as he did after the 2020 election.

Ginsberg, the GOP election attorney, noted that the Republican National Committee’s plans for 200,000 poll watchers means the Trump campaign should be able to provide evidence to back up any alleged fraud claims.

“That means they ought to have hard evidence of anything that’s amiss,” he said. “And if they can’t produce hard evidence, then that should be a pretty clear indication that it once again is rhetorical smoke and not evidence.”

CNN’s Yahya Abou-Ghazala, Sarah Boxer, Pamela Brown, Ethan Cohen, Marshall Cohen, Zachary Cohen, Devan Cole, Daniel Dale, Curt Devine, Danny Freeman, John Fritze, Brian Fung, Majlie de Puy Kamp, Holmes, Lybrand, Sean Lyngaas, Sara Murray, Paula Reid, Fredreka Schouten, Tierney Sneed, Donie O’Sullivan and Casey Tolan contributed to this report.
CNN —

Donald Trump, who said in Pennsylvania on Sunday that he regrets leaving the White House in 2021, is ending the 2024 campaign the way he began it — dishing out a stew of violent, disparaging rhetoric and repeated warnings that he will not accept defeat if it comes.

At a rally in the must-win battleground state, the former president told supporters that he “shouldn’t have left” office after losing the 2020 election; described Democrats as “demonic”; complained about a new poll that shows him no longer leading in Iowa, a state he twice carried; and said he wouldn’t mind if a gunman aiming at him also shot through “the fake news.”

Trump spent much of his speech pushing unfounded claims of cheating by Democrats in the 2024 election and sowing doubts about its integrity as polls show him and Vice President Kamala Harris deadlocked nationally. He ranted about alleged election interference this year and lamented his departure from office after losing to Joe Biden four years ago.

“I shouldn’t have left. I mean, honestly, because we did so, we did so well,” Trump said during his rally in Lititz as he claimed the US-Mexico border was more secure under his administration.

It was a rare public admission of regret over participating in the peaceful transfer of power after he incited his supporters to violently storm the US Capitol as he tried to subvert the results of the 2020 election that he lost but refused to concede — something Trump is currently facing federal charges over.

Trump, whose voice sounded hoarse throughout his speech, repeatedly railed against the new Iowa survey released Saturday night, which showed no clear leader between him and Harris in the state.

“We got all this crap going on with the press and with fake stuff and fake polls,” Trump said, claiming the poll from the Des Moines Register and Mediacom was put out by “one of my enemies.”

The poll delivered a gut punch to those inside Trump’s orbit Saturday night, several people familiar with the reaction told CNN. The former president has been fuming privately over the numbers, arguing the highly anticipated poll should never have been released.

Trump’s advisers have sought to assure him the survey is not accurate, blasting it as way off and telling him there’s always one poll that stands out. His long-standing pollster issued a memo Saturday night arguing it was a “clear outlier.” But the gender breakdown showing that women are driving a shift toward Harris has privately concerned Trump’s allies, with a focus on the poll’s finding that women in Iowa favor Harris over him, 56% to 36%.

At another point during his Lititz rally, the former president, who has been the target of two assassination attempts, suggested he’d be OK with a gunman aiming at him also shooting through the “the fake news.”

“I have this piece of glass here. But all we have really over here is the fake news, right? And to get me, somebody would have to shoot through the fake news,” Trump said. “And I don’t mind that so much. I don’t mind.”

A Trump campaign spokesman said after the rally that the former president was actually musing about how the press was protecting him.

“President Trump was stating that the Media was in danger, in that they were protecting him and, therefore, were in great danger themselves, and should have had a glass protective shield, also. There can be no other interpretation of what was said. He was actually looking out for their welfare, far more than his own!” Steven Cheung said in a statement.

Responding to Trump’s comments Sunday, a senior Harris campaign official said in a call with reporters that “for Trump, this election really is all about his own grievances and he’s not focused on the American people.”

In his speech, Trump baselessly claimed Democrats are “fighting so hard to steal this damn thing,” and that voting machines would be tampered with.

“They spend all this money, all this money on machines, and they’re going to say, we may take an extra 12 days to determine. And what do you think happens during that 12 days? What do you think happens?” Trump said.

The crowd yelled back: “Cheating!”

“These elections have to be, they have to be decided by 9 o’clock, 10 o’clock, 11 o’clock on Tuesday night. Bunch of crooked people, these are crooked people,” Trump said.

The former president’s newest round of threats caps off a campaign with one of the darkest, most menacing closing messages in modern American history. In the last few weeks alone, Trump has doubled down on a pledge to use the military to combat the civilian “enemy within” and mused — in the guise of arguing he was the pro-peace candidate — about how former Rep. Liz Cheney, one of his loudest conservative Republican critics, would fare with guns “trained on her face” in a war zone.

This weekend has brought its own slate of bizarre moments. On Sunday, Trump told NBC News that Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s recent post on X about removing fluoride from public water if Trump were to win a second term “sounds OK to me.”

“Well, I haven’t talked to him about it yet, but it sounds OK to me,” Trump told NBC. “You know, it’s possible.”

And a night earlier in North Carolina, Trump chuckled approvingly at an audience member’s suggestion that Harris worked as a prostitute. After Trump insisted yet again that Harris did not work in a McDonald’s when she was younger, a supporter in Greensboro shouted, “She worked on a corner!”

Trump laughed, paused for a beat, then declared, “This place is amazing.”

As the crowd laughed, he added: “Just remember it’s other people saying it, it’s not me.”

His response to the crude remark underscored how the rot in American political discourse, a long-running spiral, went into overdrive after Trump’s arrival on the presidential campaign trail in 2015. It’s a contrast from seven years earlier, when a supporter of John McCain said during a campaign event that Barack Obama was lying about his identity, claiming, “He’s an Arab,” and the then-GOP nominee took the microphone from her hands, insisting his rival was “a decent family man (and) citizen that just I just happen to have disagreements with on fundamental issues.”

Even then, though, Trump was lurking. He would soon emerge as one of the leading proponents of the “birther” conspiracy theory, a racist narrative that said Obama was not born in the US.

In the run-up to this year’s election, Trump has used the former president’s full name — Barack Hussein Obama — in an attempt to demonize him. He frequently mispronounces Harris’ first name, though he has shown before he knows the proper way to say it, and called her a “sh*t vice president.”

At other times, Trump has descended into farce. During a rally in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, last month, he spent some time recalling the late, great golfer Arnold Palmer’s naked body.

“Arnold Palmer was all man, and I say that in all due respect to women, I love women,” Trump said. “This man was strong and tough, and I refused to say it, but when he took showers with the other pros they came out of there, they said, ‘Oh, my God. That’s unbelievable.’”

Trump’s message to — and more often, about — women has also become increasingly bizarre. At a rally in Green Bay, Wisconsin, last week, he told the crowd that his aides had asked him to stop saying he would be the “protector” of American women, in part because they recognized it as inappropriate.

“‘Sir, please don’t say that,’” Trump said he was advised. “Why? I’m president. I want to protect the women of our country. Well, I’m going to do it, whether the women like it or not.”

Recent polls have shown the former president trailing Harris with female voters by a significant margin across demographic lines. Neither Trump nor his allies have pushed back on the numbers, instead imploring more men to vote.

“Early vote has been disproportionately female,” said Charlie Kirk, the leader of a right-wing group that Trump has entrusted with managing much of his ground game. “If men stay at home, Kamala is president. It’s that simple.”

Harris has mostly countered Trump’s bleak offerings with promises to bring an end to the tribal clashes that have defined most of the past decade.

“Our democracy doesn’t require us to agree on everything. That’s not the American way,” Harris said during a speech last week from the Ellipse in Washington, DC. “We like a good debate. And the fact that someone disagrees with us, does not make them ‘the enemy from within.’ They are family, neighbors, classmates, coworkers.”

“It can be easy to forget a simple truth,” she added. “It doesn’t have to be this way.”

The vice president has also zeroed in on Trump’s attacks on rivals and detractors, including a persistent insistence he wants to use the power of the federal government to punish them. By contrast, Harris likes to say, she is focused on policy, like a push to restore federal abortion rights following the Supreme Court’s 2022 decision overturning Roe v. Wade.

“On day one, if elected, Donald Trump would walk into that office with an enemies list,” Harris said in Washington. “When elected, I will walk in with a to-do list full of priorities on what I will get done for the American people.”

This story has been updated with additional reporting.

CNN’s Kaitlan Collins and Samantha Waldenberg contributed to this report.
We talked politics at the North Carolina state fair — and learned 3 key things

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

North Carolina crashed the swing state party in 2024, especially after Vice President Kamala Harris replaced President Joe Biden atop the Democratic presidential ticket.

All along, political observers had expected six states to decide whether or not former President Donald Trump would return to the White House: Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Nevada, Arizona and Georgia.

But North Carolina was the state Trump won by the smallest margin in 2020, and as this year's presidential contest has entered its final stretch, both parties are pouring resources, time and energy into the Tarheel State. Polls show a close race in North Carolina.

To get a sense of where things stand away from the campaign rallies themselves, an NPR team took on the hardship assignment of a trip to the state fair. Amid the midway rides and fried food stands, we learned three key things about the race in North Carolina.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

1. Election ads — and Mark Robinson — loom large

The most remarkable thing about our time in North Carolina was how inundated we were by the election. Every commercial break on just about every TV channel is filled, start to finish, with campaign ads. The same goes for the radio, and the pre-roll ads popping up on YouTube and social media feeds.

Sponsor Message

The election wormed its way into the fairgrounds, too: vendors were selling airbrushed t-shirts featuring Trump's defiant post-assassination attempt fist pump, with the caption "You Missed!" A beef jerky stand converted its tip jar into a straw poll, with one cup featuring an image of Harris and the other of Trump. (Trump had a decisive $12-to-$0 lead in this unscientific poll.)

"I get to the point where I'm ready for the election to be over," Deja Boston told us, as she, her husband Rahmode, and their 6-month-old-daughter Kynslei stopped near the North Carolina Democratic Party's booth. She sees "too many" ads — "a thousand." The Bostons tick off the incoming political content: text messages… television… radio…

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

What, if anything, has cut through all that noise? The Bostons both instantly respond: Mark Robinson.

The state's Republican lieutenant governor, who's running for governor, is playing a starring role in many of the ads blanketing North Carolina. Not necessarily his own campaign's ads, but rather, Democratic attack ads trying to link Republicans up and down the ballot to Robinson's controversial statements and policy stances, especially his strict opposition to abortion rights.

The Trump campaign and other Republicans have distanced themselves from Robinson, especially in the wake of a CNN report Robinson denies that ties him to racist and offensive comments made on a pornographic website. But he still has his supporters.

"He's very vocal, he's very opinionated," said Faye New. "But they have taken some of the things he said out of context. They don't tell you the whole paragraph. They just see one line and say, ‘Oh, that sounds nasty, let's put it in there.’"



Sponsor Message

2. Everyone is anxious

Faye New is an unabashed Republican hardliner. We approach her because of her outfit: a bright pink WOMEN FOR ROBINSON cap, and a t-shirt that reads, "I'm voting for the convicted felon." (A New York jury found Trump guilty of falsifying business records in a criminal case earlier this year. He's facing felony charges in three additional cases, as well.)

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

She's quick with an answer on everything, except … the outcome of what's shaping up to be an incredibly tight race in North Carolina. Both the Trump and Harris campaigns have spent millions of dollars in the state, and have returned week after week for campaign events. Polls show a near-deadlocked race in a state that hasn't voted Democrat on the presidential level since 2008. "It's tighter than I like it," New concedes. "But you never know ‘til it's all said and done."

Later on, we come across Debbie and Lew Love, who are wearing homemade hats supporting Harris: they feature a blue comma, as in the punctuation, and a red cursive LA. They voted earlier that day, and likely don't share many opinions with New, except that same anxiety about the result. "My gut starts churning at 2 a.m., and I can't get it off my mind," Debbie Love said. “I just pray about it."

Lew Love takes a more optimistic view: "If [Democrats] can carry North Carolina, we'll be in good shape."

That's true. The state's 16 electoral votes will likely play a key role in either Harris or Trump's path to 270, and the White House.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

3. The 2024 election is about … many things

The political importance of North Carolina is clear. What's less clear is what the 2024 presidential race is primarily about. We asked every voter we came across what, to them, the stakes and story of the election were, and got a wide range of answers.

Sponsor Message

Like many Democrats, Debbie Lew said it came down to reproductive rights and the ongoing fallout in state legislatures across the country from the U.S. Supreme Court's 2022 decision overturning Roe v. Wade.

"Don't make me start crying over the abortion thing. It tears my heart out of my chest," Lew said. "Because if a 12-year-old, 13-year-old, 16-year-old — if they're impregnated," she said, trailing off. "I need to have the right to decide."

The North Carolina legislature passed a 12-week abortion ban in the wake of the Dobbs decision. It's a major theme of Democratic campaign ads, and Harris is campaigning on signing a federal law restoring protections previously granted by Roe v. Wade.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

Many Republicans see the race differently — even Dr. Bill Pincus, who was manning North Carolina Right To Life's booth at the fair. Pincus spoke passionately about how he believes life begins at conception, and that to him, opposing abortion rights is about protecting life. But when we asked him what the election was about, he said the economy. "I think the real thing is everybody's hurting, because prices have gone up so much," he said.

Inflation has leveled out over the past year, but the topic remains raw, and politically potent, for conservatives. Derek Nipper, who was working the state Republican Party's booth, said for him, the election is about "my wallet. I remember when Trump was in office, I was able to put up not a lot, but maybe $200 a paycheck." Now, he said, "I'm struggling to make it to payday with money in my pocket."

There's one more factor — one that Harris is not campaigning on directly, but that's nevertheless top of mind to many voters. "To be honest with you," said Deja Boston, "it's just historical for me as a Black woman."
Women sharing personal stories about abortion bans have become a political force

toggle caption Izzy Lewis

If the US Supreme Court had not overturned Roe v. Wade, Nancy Davis and Kaitlyn Joshua might never have met, or become public figures.

But within weeks of the ban taking effect in 2022, both women were denied abortion care in their home state of Louisiana.

This story was produced in partnership with KFF Health News.

Ever since, they have been talking about their frightening and fraught experiences, joining a new wave of women willing to publicly share their medical experiences, and wielding a new kind of political power.

Dozens of women have been speaking out loud what many previously had kept private. As part of the fight for abortion rights, many of them have been campaigning across the country for politicians — especially Vice President Kamala Harris — and participating in media interviews, political rallies, protests and lawsuits.

Sponsor Message

It’s an open question, but some believe their stories and the reproductive rights issue could change election outcomes — both at the federal level, and in states, including those considering ballot initiatives on abortion rights.

How Davis and Joshua went public

In the summer of 2022, Nancy Davis, already a mother of two girls, was expecting her third child. In late July, when she was 10 weeks pregnant, her doctors in Baton Rouge told her the fetus was developing without a skull. It’s called acrania, and is always fatal for the fetus.

But Louisiana had banned nearly all abortions on Aug. 1, and after that, Davis’s doctors refused to terminate her pregnancy.

toggle caption Angelle Bradford

Davis was devastated, and then she took a dramatic next step, one that has become increasingly common since the Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe in the Dobbs case. She went public .

Davis emailed a local TV station in Baton Rouge, and started giving interviews to other local, and then national, news outlets.

Davis soon hired a civil rights lawyer and held a press conference on the steps of the Louisiana capitol, calling on state lawmakers to change the law. Her goal was to save other women from hearing the message the doctors had given her: “Basically they said I had to carry my baby, to bury my baby,” Davis said.

Sponsor Message

Even with all this publicity, it took Davis several weeks to gather enough money to travel to New York to end her pregnancy. Through it all, she continued to speak out, even appearing on the Dr. Phil show.

“I knew if I was going through it, other people was going through it as well,” Davis told NPR.

A frightening miscarriage at home

While Davis was talking to the media, another Baton Rouge woman, Kaitlyn Joshua, was beginning her own slow-motion collision with the new state law. It was early September 2022, and Joshua was 11 weeks pregnant with her second child. She was busy getting ready for her daughter’s fourth birthday, when she started miscarrying.

She was in excruciating pain, and bleeding so much that her husband feared for her life.

Over the course of two days , Joshua went to two different emergency rooms seeking abortion care to empty her uterus and complete the miscarriage. This would lessen the bleeding and pain.

But Louisiana’s abortion ban had only been in effect for six weeks, so doctors refused to perform a D&C procedure or prescribe medications for the miscarriage. Joshua ended up miscarrying at home, with only her family’s support, in pain and frightened for her health.

Joshua remembered seeing Davis telling her story in the news. She was inspired to go public as well. She spoke at a state health department hearing on Louisiana’s abortion ban, and later told her story to NPR and then to other prominent outlets.

Joshua and Davis met at an abortion rights rally in 2023 and became friends.

They lean on each other for support, especially when testifying against anti-abortion laws in Louisiana’s legislature capitol, which is 76% male, majority white, and comprised of a supermajority of anti-abortion Republicans.

Hitting the campaign trail with Democrats

Both Davis and Joshua began traveling with President Biden’s re-election campaign, and later switched to campaigning with Vice President Kamala Harris. Both women attended the 2023 State of the Union address.

Sponsor Message

Joshua appeared in a television campaign ad for Biden. She was also one of several women who spoke at the Democratic National Convention in August, sharing traumatic stories about how the Dobbs decision had harmed their pregnancy care.

“No woman should experience what I endured, but too many have,” Joshua told the convention crowd and millions of voters watching from home. “They write to me, saying, ‘What happened to you, happened to me.’”

The convention also featured two Texas women who sued their state after being denied abortions — Kate Cox, denied care after receiving a fatal fetal diagnosis, and Amanda Zurawski, who became septic after doctors refused to provide miscarriage care.

toggle caption Destiny Hamilton

Another speaker was Anya Cook, a Florida patient who lost half her blood volume after she was denied abortion care and began miscarrying in a bathroom .

There have been many more patients with similar stories going public over the last two years. And those stories have helped shape the election in new ways.

How abortion storytellers could change voters' minds

On November 5, voters in 10 states will decide whether to add abortion rights to their state constitutions.

Depending on the outcomes, areas of the South and Midwest could experience dramatic reversals after two years of extremely rigid bans on abortion.

Vice President Harris is counting on support for abortion rights to help lead her to victory, and has promised to sign any federal bill that Congress might pass restoring abortions.

Republicans, sensing the political headwinds, have toned down aggressive anti-abortion messaging.

Former President Donald Trump has sent mixed messages , boasting about appointing the three Supreme Court Justices who helped overturn Roe, while also claiming his second term would be “great for women and their reproductive rights.”

Can personal stories sway voters?

Preliminary political research indicates that women like Davis and Joshua, telling their own personal stories, are reaching voters.

Sponsor Message

These stories have proliferated. A study from the University of California at San Francisco of major newspaper coverage found that just one year after the Supreme Court overturned Roe, 20% of stories about abortion included a patient’s personal experience — up from just 4% as recently as 2018.

These stories often feature women with wanted pregnancies who were denied medical care, said one of the study authors, Katie Woodruff .

“Certainly the general public did not expect an abortion ban to be affecting basic maternal health,” she said.

One poll found women voters rank abortion as their number two priority this election cycle, just a few points behind the economy.

Over three-quarters of women want abortion legal in all or most cases, another survey found. Even in swing states, majorities of both Democrats and Republicans told pollsters they support abortion rights.

toggle caption Nancy Davis

Harvard professor Robert Blendon cautioned that voters often say they support certain policies, but that support hasn’t always dictated who they end up voting for.

But this year, there are some signals that the new cadre of abortion storytellers could be turning surging support for abortion rights into actual votes.

Tresa Undem, a pollster with PerryUndem , said her surveys show that voters who have heard stories like Davis and Joshua’s, when compared to those who haven't, are more likely to say the state of abortion rights will affect who they cast their ballot for in 2024.

The shift was particularly striking among independents who favor abortion rights: 73% who heard those stories said the abortion issue will affect which candidate they vote for.

But for those who hadn’t heard such stories, only 21% said the abortion issue would affect who they vote for.

Undem added that despite the rising media coverage, Republicans are less likely to have heard the stories of women denied care.

Sponsor Message

How advocates for ballot measures are using the stories

Advocates in Florida, one of the 10 states with an abortion rights measure on the November ballot, have made these stories central to their advertising and messaging.

The campaign is featuring the stories of women such as Cook and Shanae Smith-Cunningham, two Floridians who were each denied care after their waters broke early in pregnancy. Canvassers for the “Yes on 4” campaign bring them up every time they knock on a voter’s door.

“Our hope is that those stories are so impactful that they remember when they are in the ballot booth,” said Natasha Sutherland, the communications director for the "Yes on 4" campaign.

Organizers who recently won abortion rights ballot measures in Ohio and Michigan told NPR that personal stories were key to getting out the vote.

“That's what actually drives it home for people and makes them realize, ‘Wow, I need to get to the polls to do this, because there's somebody out there in my town, in my community, maybe in my family, that's counting on me to take this action,’” said Gabriel Mann, who worked as the communications director for Ohioans for Reproductive Rights, the group that passed Issue 1 establishing abortion rights in 2023.

Nicole Wells Stallworth, one of the leaders of Michigan’s Proposal 3 in 2022, said the campaign leaned into abortion stories after internal polling showed just how effective it was.

She said ads featuring women’s personal stories increased support for the proposal by an average of 5.7%. With moderate voters the shift was even greater: 6.9%.

The risks and rewards for abortion storytellers

All that data underline what Davis and Joshua say they have experienced routinely after telling their stories: people change their minds.

Joshua has spoken to Black conservative Christians about her story, and then heard them preach from the pulpit about the need for abortion care, she said. Davis’s own mother, who used to oppose abortion rights, now supports them, Davis said.

Sponsor Message

“People even say ‘You know, I've crossed over.’ Or, like, ‘Now I'm pro-choice, or, like, you made me change my way of thinking,” Davis said.

toggle caption Landon Joshua

Speaking out can attract strong political blowback and online harassment.

After Joshua spoke at the Democratic National Convention, Louisina’s Attorney General posted on X that “Democrats have their facts wrong.”

Davis has found anti-abortion groups commenting on her story and suggesting that her fetus could have somehow lived without a skull.

Both women went on to have healthy pregnancies after their medical experiences being denied abortions.

Joshua now has a one-year-old son. Davis’s daughter, her third, was born in the spring.

Both continue to travel for the Harris campaign, children in tow, while juggling their jobs and other commitments.

Joshua was recently named one of the Women of the Year by Glamour magazine.

One question Joshua keeps encountering is why she doesn’t just leave Louisiana.

“And I'm like ‘No. I am a Black woman in Louisiana. My people built the state. We're gonna stay and fight for the state that we love,’” Joshua said.

“And I just think that says so much more.”
The election in Georgia is tight. Meet 5 groups of voters who will shape the outcome

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

ATLANTA — Georgia had among the tightest margins of any swing state in 2020. That year, Joe Biden won the Peach State by 11,779 votes, the first Democrat to capture Georgia’s electoral votes since 1992.

Since then, Georgia voters reelected a Republican governor and Democratic U.S. senator in 2022. Polls suggest Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump are locked in a tight race and both campaigns have devoted significant resources to winning the state.

Harris is campaigning in Atlanta on Saturday and Trump has a rally scheduled near Macon on Sunday.

Sponsor Message

While Georgia had been a Republican stronghold since the early 2000s, this Sun Belt state has been growing in population and diversity, especially in the suburbs around Atlanta.

In a state decided recently by such small margins, subtle shifts among any demographic can matter. And of course, no demographic is a monolith — political diversity certainly exists within races, classes and geographies. But here are five groups of voters to watch who will be key in determining who wins Georgia — and possibly the presidency.



Suburban women

Atlanta’s suburbs have been a key driver of the political shifts in Georgia over the last decade. As they have gained population and become more diverse, many suburban communities that have historically been deep red have become more purple.

In Atlanta’s northern suburbs, home to many well-off, highly educated voters, the Trump presidency and the overturning of Roe v. Wade accelerated flight from the Republican Party.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

On the town green in Alpharetta, which is decorated with scarecrows for Halloween, friends Emily Lillystone and Shawna Goelz both say they are not thrilled with their choices for president.

Both identify as political independents, support abortion rights and believe Republicans would be better for their family finances. Both voted for Biden in 2020. But this year, they came to different conclusions in the presidential race. Lillystone is voting for Harris; Goelz for Trump, even though she thinks he is “morally awful.”

Sponsor Message

“I don’t think as a woman I want the government involved in what I’m deciding to do with my body and nor do I want that for my daughters,” says Lillystone.

Georgia law bans most abortions after roughly six weeks. The law took effect after the conservative majority on the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade.

“I completely agree with everything Emily said,” Goelz says. “However, I feel like my safety walking down the street to get a soda is more important than whether or not my daughter can have an abortion.”

FBI data shows violent crime fell nationwide in 2023, including in Atlanta, but many Americans still report feeling unsafe and crime has been a keystone of Republican campaign messaging.

Atlanta’s suburbs helped propel Biden’s win in 2020. During the midterms that followed, they were home to many of the tens of thousands of voters who split their tickets between Democrat Raphael Warnock for U.S. Senate and Republican Brian Kemp for governor.



Young voters

Voters ages 18-29 account for roughly 21% of registered voters in Georgia. The relatively young population is one reason CIRCLE, the Tufts University research center focused on young voters, ranks Georgia among the top states where young voters can play a key role in the election.

However, CIRCLE also found voter registration among 18-29 year-olds in Georgia is down 8% from 2020.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

Millennial and Gen Z voters regularly cite housing affordability and student loan relief as top issues driving their vote. For Sydney Craddock, a first-year biology major at Spelman College in Atlanta, she is thinking most about reproductive rights and the chance to elect the first woman to the White House.

“This is probably one of the biggest elections we’ve had so far,” Craddock says. “As an African American woman, to have someone like that in a position of power as president, is crazy to me. Little Black girls, we didn’t see people in those positions that look like us.”

Like other age groups, there is also a gender gap between Harris and Trump among young voters. The most recent Harvard Youth Poll Survey found that young women favor Harris over Trump by 30 points, compared to 10 points for young men. The Trump campaign sees young men as prime targets for outreach.

Jackson Anderson, an 18-year-old trade school student from Newnan, Ga., studying construction management, is voting for the first time this fall and says Trump represents the kind of toughness he wants to see in a president.

Sponsor Message

“I know he’s a fighter,” Anderson says, waiting in line for a recent Trump rally in Atlanta. “As we saw, July 13th, he got shot and raised his fist in the air, and he said, ‘Fight, fight, fight.’ I know he cares about this country. He doesn’t give up.”



Black men

Black voters make up roughly 30% of registered voters in Georgia — the highest proportion of any swing state. Black women are the most reliable Democratic voting powerhouse, with Black men not far behind, but some polls have suggested softening support for Democrats among Black men.

Eric Alston is a regular at Cascade Skating Rink in Atlanta. On a recent Wednesday night, Alston was lacing up his rollerskates when R&B star Usher showed up for a get out the vote event.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

Alston says he wishes he had other choices for president. He says Trump and Harris are neither all good or all bad in his eyes. Earlier in the campaign, he did not totally rule out voting for either of them. At 61, protecting Social Security and ensuring it keeps pace with inflation is a priority for him.

“For our older members of the country that served in the military, worked jobs, kept communities going and raised families, now they’re reaching a point where they’re not going to receive the help they paid into a system to receive,” Alston says.

Despite reservations about both candidates, Alston says he would never skip an election, noting he was born before the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

“Oh I’m definitely not going to stay at home,” Alston says. “A no-vote is unfathomable from where I come from. I was born without all my rights. There is no way I would abdicate exercising such an important responsibility as a citizen.”

Even though Alston did have some openness to Trump, he says in the end, he cannot get over how he conducted himself in office.

An October NAACP poll of registered voters found that the likelihood of Black men under 50 voting for Trump decreased to 21%, down from 27% in August.

Shaquille Booker, 28, an Atlanta artist and kickboxer also skating at Cascade, said earlier this month he had not done much research about the election, but he planned to. Undecided between Harris and Trump, Booker says he usually votes, but did not in 2020. Lowering taxes and making it easier to start a small business, he says, would most directly impact his life.

Sponsor Message

“I care about fair treatment and equal job opportunities,” Booker says.



Asian American/Pacific Islander and Latinos

University of Georgia political science professor Charles Bullock has a rule of thumb that for Democrats to win Georgia: they have to capture 30% of white voters and Black voters have to comprise 30% of the voters who cast ballots. But Emory University political science professor Andra Gillespie says that rule may need a slight update, as Asian Americans and Latinos become a larger share of the electorate.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

Judy Zhu and Wei Kang Ding are voting in their first presidential election, after casting their first ballots in the 2022 midterms once they became U.S. citizens. They have been taking their vote very seriously, watching debates and researching the platforms of the candidates and political parties.

Zhu says they have friends in their community across the political spectrum, from strong Trump or Harris supporters to undecided voters and those who are just plain fed up. For Zhu, the economy, health care and democracy are driving her vote.

“I think I have definitely changed my mind a couple of times before I finally decided who to vote for,” Zhu says. While she did not want to share publicly who she landed on, she did say her and her husband did not vote for the same presidential candidate.

Georgia’s AAPI population grew by 48% between 2012 and 2022, according to the nonprofit Asian Americans Advancing Justice Atlanta. Indian Americans, Korean Americans and Chinese Americans comprise the largest AAPI communities in Georgia.

The AAPI turnout rate has lagged behind white and Black voters, but participation is increasing.

According to AAJA, the AAPI turnout rate increased by 7% between 2018 and 2022 midterm elections.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

Reading a comic book at the Peachy Corners Cafe, which serves bubble tea and Vietnamese coffee, Tha Vin says this election felt so important, he gathered his whole family to go to the polls together.

Sponsor Message

As a former refugee who came to the U.S. from Cambodia in 1980, Vin says the language some Republicans, including Trump, are using to describe immigrants is shaping his vote.

“I’m a gun owner, like I find I want to vote Republican,” Vin said. “But the rhetoric toward immigrants has been something that has made me not want to vote Republican.”

Like Georgia’s AAPI community, the Latino electorate is also growing. The state’s Latino eligible voter population quadrupled since 2000, according to the Latino Data Hub at UCLA. Latinos now account about 4.6% of registered voters in Georgia.

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

While both Latino and AAPI voters skew heavily Democratic, these groups are not homogenous and have diversity in voting preferences. Republicans think they can make up ground with some of these voters.

Daniela Usurin, who came to the U.S. from Uruguay 54 years ago, is voting for Trump because of his pledge to crack down on illegal immigration, which she says hurts people who came to the U.S. legally like her. She is also concerned by inflation.

“The prices of food and gas, they’re just getting way too high,” Usurin says. “I’m retired. I’m glad that I have a pension in addition to social security, otherwise I couldn’t make it.”



Voters outside metro Atlanta

Harris and Trump have held most of their rallies this year in vote-rich Metro Atlanta, home to the state’s Democratic engine and also to the independent-minded suburban voters both parties need to reach.

But to win, Republicans need to juice turnout in barn-red counties, activating low-propensity voters who have become engaged in politics because of Trump. Democrats need to cut into Republican margins in pockets of the state outside Atlanta, believing they can lose by less in rural counties and smaller metros.

Sponsor Message

One way Democrats are doing this is by engaging rural Black voters who historically have not received much attention from campaigns. Democratic candidates like Stacey Abrams and U.S. Sens. Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock pursued this approach in recent campaigns.

At a campaign rally with former President Bill Clinton in Columbus, Heather Smith says the attention is an encouraging sign. Smith lives in nearby Harris County, which hugs the Alabama border and remembers Clinton campaigning in Columbus in 1992, the year she turned 18.

“People are just out here working and doing their thing and they really don’t want to watch the news anymore,” Smith says. “So face to face contact is going to be the difference.”

toggle caption Matthew Pearson/WABE

Across the state, outside Augusta, Trump won Columbia County with 66% of the vote in 2016. He won it by 4 points less in 2020.

Columbia County resident Jennifer Michael supported former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley in the GOP primary. When Haley dropped out of the race, Michael was devastated, but not surprised.

Since then, she has struggled with how to vote and Michael says her analysis “only changed a little bit,” when Biden stepped aside.

“There’s been just so much turmoil and honestly I had an overarching feeling of dread,” she says. “There’s no other way to say it. It just wasn’t pretty.”

Michael, who is retired, says she cares about preserving Medicare and Social Security. She also supports abortion rights and has concerns about the border, but is hopeful Harris means it when she talks about signing the bipartisan border bill that stalled earlier this year. She says lately she has had to focus on cleaning up damage from Hurricane Helene, but has been trying to learn more about Harris.

“To see if she was somebody I could either be happy voting for, be okay voting for, or one of those where you hold your nose and you vote anyway,” Michael says. “I still don’t know. It will not be Trump. I can be 1000% sure it will not be him. Another Trump presidency scares the bejesus out of me.”
Scranton, Pennsylvania CNN —

In front of a few dozen union carpenters here this weekend, President Joe Biden was getting worked up.

“Now, I know some of you guys are tempted to think it’s macho guys,” Biden said, alluding to his onetime rival, former President Donald Trump, who is courting male voters in a razor-thin election against his vice president.

Not to be out-machoed, Biden recalled some long-ago rumble that went down here when he was a child.

“I tell you what, man, when I was in Scranton, we used to have a little trouble going down the plot once in a while,” he said, sounding anything but threatening. “These are the kind of guys you’d like to smack in the ass.”

Here in his hometown, the president was making what is likely to be his final trip to a battleground before Election Day. After 50 years in public life, it was a subdued final campaign appearance as a sitting office holder.

In Biden’s political winter, perhaps it was inevitable it would all come back to Scranton.

The day had the markings of a Biden classic: There was the mayor’s toddler on the tarmac, introduced as Biden’s “ice cream buddy”; there was the round of “Happy Birthday,” sung to a stranger (“She’s turning 41!”); there was the vague reference to schoolyard violence.

Vice President Kamala Harris was nowhere nearby; her campaign rally in Atlanta began around the same time Biden spoke. Nor was Sen. Bob Casey, locked in a tight battle for his Senate seat here.

None of it was quite the final-weekend campaign rally Biden once hoped to be hosting in support of his own candidacy. It wasn’t even the barnstorming tour of Pennsylvania he once envisioned conducting in support of Harris.

But even if it was a far smaller affair, Biden evinced no disappointment in his address to 100 or so members of the local carpenters union. Tacked on the wall behind his podium, next to the signs for the Harris-Walz campaign, were a few posters saying simply: “Thank you, Joe.”

Biden is greeted on the tarmac by Scranton Mayor Paige Cognetti, second from the right and holding her daughter Brooke Anne, and Cognetti's mother, Lynda Gebhardt, at Wilkes-Barre Scranton International Airport in Pennsylvania on November 2, 2024. Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP

“You know, we’ve asked a lot of each other, you and I, unions and me,” Biden said, recalling his long reliance on organized labor in his half-century of public life. “I ask you one more thing. I’m asking your support for Kamala and Tim Walz.”

“I’m not just asking for me,” he went on. “I’m going to be gone.”

Kept mostly away from the campaign trail this year, Biden has slowly come to terms with what has been a diminishing presence in the country’s political discourse.

An episode this week involving a verbal flub about Trump supporters being “garbage” only seemed to confirm the anxieties of many Democrats about giving Biden a larger role. In the closing stretch of a razor-thin campaign, the last thing anyone on Harris’ team wanted to be doing was responding to an apparently accidental insult made by someone who is no longer a candidate.

There was a time when Biden imagined a far greater role for himself this fall. He declared in September he would be “on the road” from Labor Day onward, advocating for his vice president.

But as the 2024 campaign draws to a photo finish, the political imperatives of distance from an unpopular incumbent outweighed any desire on Harris’ part to pay homage to the man who handpicked her as his successor.

To be sure, Harris has demonstrated only loyalty to Biden, in public but also in private. She genuinely respects and cares for the president and understands his desire to help her win.

But in a “do no harm” election, where every utterance could be a dealbreaker for a handful of voters in a battleground state, there has been little room for celebrating Biden’s legacy, at least on the campaign trail.

And so, as Harris headlines arena rallies with Beyoncé and Jennifer Lopez — and as Democratic surrogates like Barack and Michelle Obama and even the first lady, Dr. Jill Biden, make swings across the battlegrounds — Biden is showing up at union halls, playing to his strengths and trying to avoid stepping in it again.

In Scranton, where the President Biden Expressway leads into downtown, the goodwill is evident.

“Scranton becomes part of your heart. It crawls into your heart. It’s real,” Biden said. “I’m so proud to be back.”

It was in Scranton that Biden spent the morning of Election Day in 2020, addressing supporters gathered outside a union hall and stopping by his childhood home.

Signing the living room wall, Biden wrote: “From this house to the White House with the grace of God.”

And it was to the White House he went, propelled by support in places like Scranton, where Biden made a pitch centered on economic opportunities and performed better among White working-class voters than his Democratic predecessors.

Workers cheer as Biden arrives to speak at the Carpenters Local Union 445 "Get Out the Vote" event in Scranton on November 2, 2024. Ting Shen/AFP/Getty Images

Biden still believes he can be of assistance in a state like Pennsylvania, where he maintains deep roots and which he’s visited more than practically anywhere else since taking office. Just since July 21, the day he announced he would drop his bid for a second term, Biden has been to Pennsylvania 10 times.

He has voiced frustration that polls show a tight race — tighter than he believes it should be, against a candidate like Trump — and wants to help where he can.

As he’s watched from the sidelines of the race that he was in a little more than three months ago, Biden has embarked on some soul-searching, those close to him say, reflecting on both the long arc of his career and its abrupt end.

Biden, these people say, remains firm in his view that he would be able to defeat his predecessor in November if he remained at the top of the Democratic ticket. But he recognizes that offering up that view to others might not be in anyone’s best interests.

“Folks love Joe Biden. And they respect and recognize that Joe Biden chose Kamala Harris to be his running mate, served alongside her as Vice President, endorsed her when he chose to step back from being our nominee,” said Sen. Chris Coons, Biden’s friend and fellow Delawarean, said this week on CNN. “I do think it’s important that folks hear from President Biden, but they know where he stands and they know that he fully embraces and supports Vice President Harris.”

As he wrapped up his speech to the carpenters here, Biden sought to lay out the stakes of Tuesday’s election.

“What will happen — what will happen if you trade in my administration for his?” he said. “No, I’m not joking. I’m nothing special.”

That moment of self-effacement prompted a cry of, “Yes you are!” from his audience, following by a chant of “Thank you, Joe!”
One muggy evening over the summer, I headed up to Joanne Trattoria, a cozy Italian restaurant on New York City’s Upper West Side. It’s an establishment that would be unexceptional if not for the fact that it is owned and run by Joe Germanotta—father of Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta, aka Lady Gaga.

The restaurant hosts regular drag nights, and the event I had tickets to was advertised as a Pride Extravaganza. There would be a buffet dinner, a drag show, and a live auction of two Lady Gaga tickets for a show in Las Vegas.

But I had also come to see if I could learn about Mr. Germanotta himself. Because despite his bonafides as the father of a queer icon and the owner of a gay-friendly Italian joint, he is something of a MAGA enthusiast. Over the past year or so, he has gone on Fox News multiple times to complain about the economy, crime, and how migrants “took over” the neighborhood where Joanne’s is located. Last month, he made his endorsement of Trump official on Fox & Friends. “They’re two vastly different people,” Germanotta said of Donald Trump and Kamala Harris. “One of them is pure, you know, and he’s a patriot. And the other, she’s just going to say whatever she needs to say to get elected. That’s basically what I hear.”

The public Trumpiness—which appears in opposition to his daughter’s politics—hasn’t stopped Germanotta from passionately hyping the goings-on at the drag bar restaurant. He tweets frequently about “Drag Me to Joanne’s,” a weekly drag dinner, and livestreams the restaurant’s events, which include drag bingo and cabaret nights. The effect is disorienting: One minute he will be retweeting a video of a Tucker Carlson interview or Ted Nugent calling for President Joe Biden to be impeached. The next, Germanotta is posting photos of himself with the drag performers and tweeting messages like, “All monsters are welcome” and “LaLa Wiggy will be back soon.”

Advertisement

The two sides of this person seemed so unaligned. I had to see the show for myself.

When Lady Gaga endorsed Joe Biden in the 2020 campaign, Donald Trump took notice. “Lady Gaga—is not too good,” Trump said at a rally. Trump then went on to claim, ominously, that he could tell “plenty of stories” about Lady Gaga.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Instead of jumping to his daughter’s defense, Germanotta sought to demonstrate his allegiance to Trump, first tweeting: “@realDonaldTrump 2020.” In a later tweet he elaborated: “You may have noticed my political and spiritual beliefs are different. liberty and freedom of choice would not be political.” (The tweets have since been deleted.)

A few months later, Lady Gaga performed at Biden’s inauguration. Fox News called up Germanotta for an interview. “I’m still very proud of her!” he told them. “I think she did a great job. She sang loud and strong and she really put her soul into it.” When they asked him about her performing so soon after Jan. 6 and the attack on the Capitol that month, and whether that worried him, he said that he had “normal fears that a father would have any time my daughter performs,” adding, “I hope everybody stays happy, safe and it’s a calm day.” (Gaga publicly endorsed Harris on Sunday.)

Advertisement

It kicked off his gig as a commentator. Germanotta went on Fox a couple times to talk about the inconveniences of COVID lockdowns. Then, to weigh in on another favorite Trump talking point. Since the spring of 2022, New York City has seen an influx of migrants, people from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa, fleeing unstable conditions in their countries. Often, Germanotta is cited as a New York small-business owner who has apparently seen his restaurant threatened because the presence of the migrants is a deterrent to customers. He has also claimed in a couple Fox interviews that the migrant population has brought prostitution and drug dealing to the area.

Advertisement

He has a lot of complaints: On Fox, he has also blamed protesters for “generating reluctance among consumers.” Many of his gripes seem to be about what he sees as the downfall of New York. He talks about the “chaos” and the proliferation of motorbikes and trash. He dislikes all the new “pot stores.” He complains about late-night loitering and noise and partying, but also claims that the streets are now empty due to fear of crime. (“I would never raise two girls here again. It’s not safe anymore,” he has said.) He makes slick, galvanizing statements like, “We need to polish the Big Apple” and “If the place looks like hell, we’re going to attract the wrong people.” Fox News eats it up with headlines like “Lady Gaga’s Father Slams New York City.” How, I wondered, did that square with someone who was running what seemed like a good old inclusive and boisterous New York City event?

Advertisement

Advertisement

When I arrived at the door of Joanne’s for the Pride Extravaganza, a sign written in pen read “$69 entry fee.” (I’d paid $99 to book my reservation for the night’s event, but I figured such were the economics of city nightlife.) My ticket included dinner, dessert, and live entertainment. Drinks were not included.

Advertisement

Advertisement

In the restaurant, there was a video playing of a Lady Gaga performance over the bar. Banners of Pride flags festooned every surface. The host walked me to the seating at the back of the restaurant, and we passed a huge blackboard that read, “Leave a message for Mr. G or Lady G.” Customers had scrawled various messages of love and pleas including “Come to Brasil.”

Advertisement

On the walls, there was plenty of Lady Gaga ephemera, specifically from Joanne, Lady Gaga’s fifth album, which is a tribute to her aunt, Joe’s late sister Joanne Stefani Germanotta, who died at age 19 from lupus. (The restaurant is named for Joanne; Gaga is also named after her aunt.) There were framed tickets from the premiere of House of Gucci at Lincoln Center and a New York license plate that read “LADYGAGA.”

The crowd in the dining room was a mix of older and younger, but most people were dressed on the preppy side in gingham and Ralph Lauren. I settled in and ordered a drink from a Gaga-themed cocktail menu. (Born This Way was made with vodka, rum, lime, simple syrup, and light beer; Edge of Glory was a mix of tequila, passionfruit, lime, and Champagne.) Ariana Grande, Scissor Sisters, Kim Petras, and Dua Lipa played over the speakers.

Advertisement

Advertisement

At 7 p.m. on the dot, drag queen Jupiter Genesis kicked off the show, wearing a layered purple boa and a metallic bustier. Strutting between the tables, her head nearly touching the ceiling, Genesis sashayed through the dining room and plucked dollar bills from diners’ hands while she introduced performances by three other queens: Victoria Holiday did a Beyoncé number in a long pink wig; BaeJing lip-synched to the White Lotus theme song with a lot of rapid tongue movements; and Ruby Fox did a Cyndi Lauper song in opera-length gloves. (Genesis herself did a Lady Gaga tribute number.) Germanotta was around the whole night, filming the performance on his iPad for the livestream. Dinner was brought in courses as we watched the queens do their thing. There were mini cannolis for dessert and colorful macarons stamped with little Pride flags.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Nearly 500 anti-LGBTQ+ bills have been pushed in the U.S. over the past few years, many of which aimed to ban or censor drag performances. Plenty of these drag bans have been unsuccessful, but this spring, the Supreme Court effectively ruled that local governments were allowed to ban drag shows. Project 2025, which has been referred to as a blueprint for Trump’s presidency (and for which J.D. Vance wrote the forward), would eliminate federal policies that promote LGBTQ+ equality. The report claims that only straight, two-parent families are safe for children, stating, “Children suffer the toxic normalization of transgenderism with drag queens and pornography invading their school libraries.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

But you won’t find Germanotta going on Fox to talk about any of that. When Slate reached out about this, Germanotta responded with a statement through a representative: “I have not nor will ever endorse any national legislation that inhibits anyone’s rights for personal or artistic expression. Assigning any derogatory labels that discriminate against personal identity is wrong and we do not tolerate it at Joanne’s.”

Advertisement

“I take tremendous pride in ensuring Joanne’s remains a safe space for LGBTQ+ and Drag Performers,” the statement said. “Freedom of speech, choice, expression and religion are cornerstones of American culture. In my view, every citizen is protected by the Constitution and these freedoms must not be censured. I vigorously support and defend the rights of diverse LGBTQ+ people and the Artistry of Drag Performers. In our country, every individual’s freedom includes open expression of artistry and personal life decisions. In my view, these rights cannot be ignored or taken away.”

For what it’s worth, I believe him. I never thought Germanotta’s views would align completely with the Fox News agenda, which seems intent on demonstrating that drag queens and queer people are a threat to society.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

But it’s clear that the Fox anchors are getting something powerful out of Germanotta’s appearances: proof that the parent of a liberal celebrity supports their ideology. And in exchange for letting Fox use his proximity to celebrity, Germanotta could push for something in return.

If Joanne’s is founded on the mission of family and community, wouldn’t Germanotta want to dedicate some of the attention he is receiving to stand up for LGBTQ+ people when they are under attack? Freedom of speech is indeed essential, as Germanotta said. And so is our responsibility to speak on behalf of our own communities when given a platform.
is the host of Explain It to Me, your hotline for all your unanswered questions. She joined Vox in 2022 as a senior producer and then as host of The Weeds, Vox’s policy podcast.

On an unseasonably warm October afternoon, I did something I’ve done just about every fall since 2009: I made my way to Howard University’s (HU) campus to celebrate homecoming. It’s an event that’s reached almost hagiographic status: name-checked in rap songs and even launching modeling careers.

The energy in October at my alma mater is always frenetic: You see students and alumni dressed their best, babies in strollers on the yard wearing HU onesies, and friends who have stayed connected across decades gathering once more at what’s lovingly referred to as the Mecca. This year, the excitement in the air was even more palpable. For lack of better phrasing, the vibe was different. On one hand, the obvious culprit was that the university was celebrating its 100th homecoming. On the other hand, that difference may have something to do with the fact that the school’s most famous alumna (at least right now) could soon become arguably the most powerful person in the world.

Vice President Kamala Harris wasn’t on campus — she has spent part of her fall at the homecomings of historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs) in swing states and not bright blue DC — but you wouldn’t know that looking around. Howard does not have a political affiliation, but vendors gathered outside the entrance to the football game hawking bucket hats with Harris’s name on them; her sorority sisters wore T-shirts with her face embroidered in pink and green; people fanned themselves with Harris/Walz fans while R&B singers entertained the crowd; and children in HU gear played in a bouncy house as their parents looked on. Despite its nonpartisan stance, the university is where Harris plans to be the night of the election, in a way creating a homecoming all her own.

In short, Howard is not a place with large numbers of Donald Trump supporters.

But Black voters are not a monolith, and the student body at Howard — one of the nation’s most prestigious universities — is not a representative sample of all Black voters. Indeed, some polls suggest that Black voters may be supporting Trump in higher numbers than in either of his previous two runs — a shift that some observers believe will be large enough to mark a “racial realignment” in American politics.

Still, the polls paint a murky picture. A recent NAACP survey found Black men were backing off their support for Trump and coming toward Harris in the final stretch before the election.

Some experts are skeptical that, after the election, the “racial realignment” will materialize. Enter Andra Gillespie, a political scientist and associate professor at Emory University who specializes in Black political participation. “The story of the cycle may very well be that people are overhyping the extent of Black defections away from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party,” she says.

She points her finger at polling — or rather, the lack thereof — for Black voters specifically. While there has been plenty of polling with enough respondents to get a clear picture of the electorate, Gillespie argues that the numbers of Black voters within those samples don’t provide a clear enough picture of Black voters. I spoke with Gillespie in October about the number of votes Trump may get from Black voters, and how even getting just 80 percent of the Black vote worries Democrats. We also talked about the roles education and age play within this segment of the electorate, and whether we’re seeing shifts based on those factors.

Below is an excerpt of our conversation, edited for length and clarity.

There’s been a lot of talk about the Harris campaign’s struggles with Black voters lately. Can you lay out what that struggle looks like? Are we talking about Black people leaving the Democratic Party en masse?

No. The first problem has been making a lot of conjectures based on sample sizes that have huge margins of error. So you’re looking at very noisy data. This started when Joe Biden was still the Democratic nominee for president. We forget that the number that comes out in surveys is the midpoint of a range of multiples. That’s why surveys are always plus or minus.

There was some evidence of [Black support] softening. We don’t know — because [Biden] dropped out of the race — whether or not people would have solidified their support for Donald Trump. Joe Biden was likely going to perform somewhere in the neighborhood of what he had done before and the numbers that you were getting, especially in the winter and early spring were suggesting that Donald Trump could get 30 percent of the African American vote. If your margin of error is minus 10, that means that that number could, in real life, be as low as 20 percent, which would suggest a gain.

I’m thinking back to the Obama years, and 20 percent would be a lot.

Twenty percent would be a lot since nobody’s come close or even in the high teens since Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon. So yeah, it would be unprecedented. But that’s what 100 people were saying or 150 people, or sometimes 200 people were saying in a survey in March or in February.

I want to be very clear: Donald Trump could actually improve his share of African American voters. I’m not saying that that’s impossible. But what’s a more likely scenario is that he makes a marginal gain.

Looking at the numbers from the New York Times/Siena College poll that came out [recently], Trump’s numbers are in what I would call the normal range for a Republican candidate. What everybody was concerned about was the fact that Kamala Harris is pulling in below 80 percent on that poll. The upper bound of the margin of error would put that number into the low 80s, which would still be underperforming. But she still has three weeks from an election.

Eighty percent of any demographic sounds like a lot of voters, but it’s framed as a problem for the Harris campaign.

It’s a problem for the campaign because Black people make up the base of the Democratic Party; it becomes a problem when she’s reliant on them turning out voting almost unanimously for her and in high numbers and in key battleground states.

In a state like Georgia, for instance, most white people are Republicans. Black people make up more than half of the Democratic Party in the state of Georgia. If they have anemic turnout or start to vote for the Republican or other candidates in the race, there just aren’t many other votes that she can pick up. For a state like Georgia to be competitive, you’ve got to perform at historical averages, which means she needs to be doing 90 percent or better. And she needs Black turnout to be proportional to their actual numbers in the electorate: 30 percent of voters.

You also have to care about it in the Blue Wall states, because even though Black people don’t make up as large a proportion of the population when you’re talking about margins, that could easily be 10,000, 20,000, or 50,000 votes.

I want to get into one of the narratives we’ve seen this election cycle, and that’s this flip in the parties when it comes to education. One of the narratives that we see emerging is that Democrats are now the party of those with college degrees — your lawyers, your doctors; and Republicans are more the party of the working class — your blue-collar workers, maybe without a college degree. How do you see that playing out among Black voters?

I think one thing that should be noted is 2016 was the year that pundits discovered that working-class white voters were Republican. That trend actually started a long time ago. I’ve seen graphs that chart this back to the mid-1970s, where you can see a decline in the number of non-college-educated white voters who are voting Democratic in elections. People just discovered it because Donald Trump ran on a populist platform, but he wasn’t doing anything revolutionary or new there at all.

So yes, we now accept that education correlates with party identification, and voting behavior with college-educated voters being more likely to vote Democratic these days. If you go back and you look at that New York Times/Siena College poll, and you look at the breakdown in terms of support for Harris and Trump based on college education, you don’t see much of a difference in terms of support among Black voters.

There are more conservative Black people who are still identifying as Democrats than Republicans, and the reason why is because of race. People who have a strong racial identity, people who perceive that the Democratic Party is the better party to handle issues related to race and civil rights. My friend, Tasha Philpot at the University of Texas, has noted that Black people aren’t necessarily putting the same weight or emphasis on social conservatism in the same way that white people might.

If education is not this predictor for who Black people will vote for, is it a predictor of if they will vote or not?

If we’re looking at support for Harris, there’s only a percentage point difference [between Black voters with and without a bachelor’s degree]. I see differences in age — that’s actually not that unusual.

We expect that younger people have weaker partisan attachments because they’re new to the electoral process. Older age cohorts, the oldest Black Americans uniformly, have made up their minds. I think part of the push on HBCU campuses is to get a group of young Black voters who are probably the most likely to show up because they’re the most resourced to be convinced to support Kamala Harris and to convince their friends to do that as well.

The idea that they’re not strong Democrats could be a harbinger of things to come, but it’s going to take me 20 years to figure out what these folks are doing when they’re in their late 30s before I would be willing to say, “We’re witnessing a realignment of Black voters away from the party.” But I think that there’s still the question of who’s actually going to show up.

I think it’s interesting because you mentioned that the Harris campaign is on this HBCU tour. They’re going to your Spelmans, your Morehouses, to talk to these young voters who are most likely to be resourced and most likely to show up to the polls. Every election year we hear the phrase “Black people are not a monolith” and that’s always been true. But I think of W.E.B. DuBois and this idea of the Talented Tenth – that one of the jobs of the Black elite is to achieve racial progress. But that leaves out the other 90 percent of Black people. How have we seen this dynamic between education, class, and politics play out through the years?

I think it’s important to keep in mind DuBois repudiated the idea of the Talented Tenth. Part of the reason why college students in general are more resourced is, by being in college, they are picking up skills that are actually going to help them navigate civics.

As they get older, their education is going to prepare them for jobs that might actually give them more flexibility to be able to vote easier than others who might have shift work where their schedule is predetermined for them. All of those things accumulate and matter in terms of predicting a person’s likelihood of turning out to vote.

Also, colleges end up reducing the costs of voter registration and voting. If you are on a college campus where your office of student life has put out voter registration materials so that all you have to do is basically pick one up as you’re walking out of a cafeteria, that’s a lot easier than somebody who is living in an apartment downtown who then has to go to a county board of elections.

Do we know why Trump has been able to peel away some of these Black voters? What are the factors there?

I am skeptical of how effective he has actually been, and we’ll see how those numbers play out on Election Day. I would not be surprised at a marginal gain of a percentage point or two, but he was never getting the 30 percent that he claimed to get. If I think about those marginal gains, there have been outreach efforts to African American men the Republican Party has been engaged in for a long period of time that actually predates Donald Trump.

The message that Trump has used to try to reach out — which has usually been worded in a really offensive way — actually harkens back to a strategy that Richard Nixon used to try to reach out to Black voters. Keep in mind, Richard Nixon didn’t do that badly, relatively speaking, among Black voters, despite the Southern Strategy, and it was because he used this strategy called Black Capitalism. He wanted to appeal to Black voters by talking about how Republican policies were more conducive to entrepreneurship and economic prosperity. And when you heard Donald Trump four years ago, trying to talk about his Platinum Plan — which, arguably, he may have ripped off from Ice Cube — that’s a play toward Black capitalism.

[Trump] in particular has benefited from having been in the public eye, having been sort of like the name-check for financial success. It’s not surprising that there’s some people who would ascribe very positive traits to him and to his presidency.

How do you see all of this playing out and evolving beyond 2024? What will you be looking out for in the years to come when it comes to the Black electorate?

I think that we are still kind of in a post-1964 paradigm, where Black people are going to be overwhelmingly Democratic in their voting orientation. I expect that the ratio is going to still be somewhere in the neighborhood of about nine to one in favor of Democrats, give or take a couple of points.

Let’s say that Republicans incrementally gain two to three percentage points per election cycle among Black voters. Then 20 years from now I might say, “Black people have been engaging in a secular realignment away from the Democratic Party and what we see is Republicans becoming more competitive over time.” If that happens and we start to point to the trend line, then we are going to start to go back to 2020 and 2024 and see that as the beginning of the shift. But if we are in the beginning of the shift — I don’t know that yet. It’s way too early for me to say that. I think the thing that will make it change is not Donald Trump.
An underestimated factor in 2024 is that, while former President Donald Trump and his closest allies have learned from their failed 2020 coup attempt, everyone else learned, too.

On the first anniversary of the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, I wrote out ways to protect American democracy in anticipation of another attempt in 2024. I’m pleased to say most of them happened.

Voters around the country rejected the “election denier” conspiracy theorists who ran for election administration positions. Congress reformed the Electoral Count Act, addressing loopholes Trump and congressional Republicans tried to exploit on Jan. 6. Big defamation payments for Dominion voting systems, as well as Georgia election workers Ruby Freeman and Shaye Moss, give right-wing media a financial disincentive against pushing blatant lies.

Voters around the country rejected the ‘election denier’ conspiracy theorists who ran for election administration positions.

The legal system didn’t prevent Trump from getting this chance to put himself above the law, but the Justice Department did successfully prosecute hundreds of Jan. 6 attackers. Some of the most dangerous, such as militia members convicted of seditious conspiracy, are in prison. They can’t attack this time, and they offer an example for others: Trump can pardon insurrectionists if he becomes president, but you’re in trouble if he doesn’t.

The Republican Party has purged officials who won’t at least go along with Trump’s “big lie” and primed its supporters to deny election results, hammering lies about fraud. And this time they’ll have Elon Musk’s X pumping out conspiracy theories and trying to stoke political violence, as he recently did in the U.K.

In the event Trump loses, some degree of violence is likely as Trump and MAGA media whip their followers into a frenzy, but law enforcement will be more prepared. And he isn’t president, so he probably can’t summon a crowd to the National Mall in Washington and facilitate violence by ordering metal detectors removed.

President Donald Trump arrives at the "Stop the Steal" rally in Washington on Jan. 6, 2021. Tasos Katopodis / Getty Images, file

There are bigger concerns at the state level. Some MAGA election administration officials will reject votes they don’t like or otherwise try to manipulate the process. We could see another fake electors scheme or state legislatures’ claiming they can overrule their voters.

But 2020 fake electors failed and got indicted, with the first conviction coming this August. To succeed this time, they’d need their states’ governors and a majority in Congress, both of which are unlikely. Even this Trump-authoritarianism-sympathetic Supreme Court rejected claims of state legislative supremacy.

A more vulnerable point is vote counting, especially in swing states where it could take days. Pennsylvania and Wisconsin can’t start processing mail-in ballots until Election Day, and Republican-led state legislatures rejected requests for reform. Trump could try to exploit any delays, declaring victory based on partial counts.

But 2020 was a better environment for that scam. Mail-in ballots had a heavy Democratic lean because Democrats took Covid more seriously than Republicans, and Trump was lying about mail-ins as a pretext to challenge the vote. This year, Republicans are encouraging early and mail-in voting. And whatever happens, an army of lawyers is ready to fight it out in court.

The biggest risk is if the election comes down to a single state, which limits the changes Trump would need, increasing incentives to attempt disruption.

There’s a risk of violent demonstrations at vote-counting centers. But areas that experienced threatening crowds last time are more prepared. For example, Maricopa County — which includes Phoenix and over half of Arizona’s population — will protect counting centers with drone surveillance and police snipers. “Election workers,” The Wall Street Journal reports, “have gone through active-shooter drills and learned to barricade themselves or wield fire hoses to repel armed mobs.”

Other swing states should increase security at vote-counting centers, if they haven’t already. Especially in populous areas that will take longer to count, such as in and around Philadelphia.

The biggest risk is if the election comes down to a single state, which limits the changes Trump would need, increasing incentives to attempt disruption. But it would draw immense national attention from all sides, with lawyers, political operatives, protesters and media descending on the state.

Election administration is diffuse and multilayered, and a lot is on camera. More judges and election officials want to uphold the law than overthrow it. We may not know the winner on Election Night, but we’ll almost certainly get an accurate count and a certified winner in time.

Trump’s lying about election results and trying to overthrow democracy with the backing of the institutional Republican Party is the positive scenario. That would sound shockingly bad to an American in 2015, but in 2024 it’s much better than the alternative.

If he wins, all bets are off. But if he loses, we can take some solace in that it’ll be harder for him and his team to try to steal the election this time around.
This is an adapted essay from "MSNBC Live Democracy 2024: The Insiders," a virtual event featuring Jen Psaki, Steve Kornacki, Michael Steele and Claire McCaskill.

The days before an election are always a time of high anxiety. But as we approach this critical moment for our democracy, it's important to take a step back, take a deep breath and relax.

So, here are 10 reasons why supporters of Vice President Kamala Harris shouldn't freak out in these final days:

Number 1: We are more motivated.

Democrats' enthusiasm has been a continuing trend across the polling. This isn't always the case, it certainly wasn’t the case in 2016. But ever since President Joe Biden stepped aside and Harris stepped in, we have had more enthusiasm on our side of the aisle.

Number 2: Harris has closed the gap on economic issues.

The vice president started out way behind Donald Trump on key economic questions, like who voters believe is better for the economy and who they believe will look out for them. Those are the kinds of things that drive "feel" voters — people who make up their minds in the last two weeks of the election. That's a good sign for Harris.

Number 3: We know what we’re doing in the field.

Just think about Trump's buddy Elon Musk — he’s offering people $100 to sign a petition that says they support the First Amendment. Do you think Democrats signed that petition? I think some did. I think there’s probably a boatload of $100 bills going out to folks who are voting or already voted for Harris.

Musk's approach isn't an accurate way to get data to find low-propensity voters. It's just another example of the billionaire thinking he's the smartest guy in the world. With no political campaign experience, he thinks he can handle getting people to the polls in a crucial battleground state like Pennsylvania.

But our team actually knows what they’re doing. We’re more experienced. We’ve been building our ground game for over a year. That ground organization is one thing the Biden campaign did well, and Harris inherited it.

Number 4: It's Trump's bros and billionaires versus you and your family.

The former president's campaign is geared toward people who think Hulk Hogan pulling off his shirt is important. It's geared toward white men, bros who listen to Joe Rogan and billionaires like Musk. That's not very appealing to people like you and me. I believe that will cost them at the ballot box.

Numbers 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10: Dobbs and its impact on women.

We've already seen the data. Women are showing up. The polls were off in 2022 because nobody expected the Democrats to do as well as they did. Reproductive rights was and still is a driving force for women voters.

And anybody who thinks that emotion has gone away when we’re watching women die and when we’re watching women who have troubled pregnancies lose the ability to have children — it's not going away.

It's more acute, more emotional and more passionately felt by women of America now than ever before. That includes Republican women and women who are married to Trump supporters. And I don’t care if they tell them they’re doing it or not, I guarantee a whole bunch of them are casting their ballots for Harris this election.
The reality is that the money received during the height of the pandemic resulted from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES), created by and voted on by Congress and issued by the federal government. At the time, President Trump just signed the bill into law. You might remember how a bill is made into law if you paid attention briefly while Rock! was playing in your elementary classroom.
Astrologers predict who will win Tuesday's presidential election. Illustration: Jianan Liu/HuffPost; Photos: Getty Images

Dayna Lynn Nuckolls, who has been a professional astrologer for 17 years, makes her predictions based on a subject’s birth charts or sometimes a bazi chart, which is a type of Chinese astrology. In 2016, she said she predicted Trump would win, and though she didn’t make that prediction public, she said it gave her confidence to begin posting her predictions on social media. This election? Nuckolls says Harris will win.

Advertisement

“Kamala Harris is having her Saturn return, her Jupiter return and her Mars return,” Nuckolls told HuffPost on Thursday. “She has the chart of the moment. She in so many ways ― who she is, what she represents, as someone who was born in the mid-1960s ― her chart is the promise of this moment that a Black woman, a child of immigrants and someone who is disrupting the status quo of identity and power in this country, she has the charge for that, and this is her moment.”

Nuckolls said that both Harris and Trump are performers.

“Both of them are very Venusian, according to their sidereal birth chart, which means you never really know what they really think or feel,” she said.

Trump is “sidereal Leo rising,” Nuckolls said, which makes him want to be the center of attention, while Harris’ Saturn and sidereal Aquarius have been beneficial because she doesn’t take any of Trump’s bait.

Trump’s age puts him in his seventh house year, which is the house of “open enemies, conflict and competition.”

Advertisement

“Because of the way that the sky is right now, and because of the way Kamala Harris’s chart is, in very explicit ways, her chart matches who that competition is and who that open enemy is,” Nuckolls said.

There might be reason to believe Nuckolls’ prediction, considering that in January, she predicted that President Joe Biden wouldn’t be on the ballot.

Kayla Murphy, a professional astrologer with more than 36,000 followers on the X social media platform, also predicted in March that Biden wouldn’t make it on the ballot and that Harris would be the Democratic nominee. Murphy told HuffPost on Thursday that she has gone back and forth on who she believes will win, but she predicts Harris will be the winner, even if there is a “third variable” at play. Murphy said there will be a Mercury station, “a shadow period the day after the election,” which is similar to “what we experienced with the 2020 election.”

“We obviously know that there was a lot of debate around, Was this correct? Were things counted incorrectly?” Murphy said. “Was there, like, someone trying to cheat or rig the election here? So I would not be surprised if we saw similar themes, regardless of who does end up winning.”

But she said that right now, Saturn is in Pisces, which “historically has always been a Democratic win.”

Advertisement

Real Astrologer Laurie, a professional astrologer with more than 30 years of experience and who has more than 238,000 followers on TikTok, predicted as early as 2023 that Trump would never be president again, and in January, she said if President Joe Biden were to win in November, “it won’t be for long.” She wasn’t convinced he would be the candidate.

On Oct. 21, Laurie stuck by her prediction in a TikTok post that has been viewed more than 280,000 times.

“From the beginning, I’ve said Trump wouldn’t lead anything again in his lifetime,” she said in the TikTok post. “The second prediction I made in general for the U.S. election was that the party that held the executive power would retain the executive power, that I was not convinced that Biden would be the candidate and that Harris had the better transits.”

In August 2020, Amy Tripp, who goes by Starheal on social media, tweeted on X that Harris would run for president in 2024 because it “coincides with her Saturn return.”

And 10 days before Biden’s July 21 decision to relinquish his reelection bid, Tripp accurately predicted he would step down on that date. She told Rolling Stone that she predicted July 21 because that was when the full moon, which is “a time of awareness, when something is revealed,” will be at 29 degrees in Capricorn, which “rules the government and old age.”

Advertisement

Murphy said that in 2025, both Harris and the United States in general have “very good transits,” which are the movements of planets through the zodiac signs. Murphy said 2025 might remind Americans of 2013, when Barack Obama was president.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Four years ago, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Americans had to wait days to find out the results of the presidential race. For the first time in decades, voters woke up on Wednesday morning still in limbo, unsure which way the country would turn. Now, with just days until the 2024 election, it’s on many minds — will that happen again?

Whether the election outcome is known on election night or a few days later will be determined by the combination of two things: how close the margin is and what the rules are for opening, processing and counting mail and early ballots in the key swing states.

Advertisement

The biggest factor in the 2020 delay was the dramatic increase in mail voting, as people tried to protect themselves and their communities from illness. But the increase — 65 million mail ballots were cast — ran up against laws in certain states that restricted, and delayed, when those ballots could be opened, processed and counted. It was obvious from the outset of the pandemic that, absent a landslide win, the winner of the 2020 presidential election would not be known on election night.

This was, and is still, totally normal. Election results have never actually been finalized on election night. But the public is accustomed to television (and now online) news sources projecting winners based on incomplete results on election night, leading to the perception that the results are conclusive.

While the official 2020 result remained in limbo, it was possible to predict which way the election would tilt based on partisan voting behaviors. Since Democrats took pandemic precautions more seriously and then-President Donald Trump spent months discouraging and demonizing mail voting, the outstanding ballots were known to tilt heavily in favor of Joe Biden. This dynamic created a “red mirage” on election night, where the in-person votes cast and counted on Election Day quickly skewed heavily in favor of Trump, while the mail ballots, which were counted later, would cause a “blue shift” in the vote total in favor of Biden.

In predictable fashion, Trump exploited this situation in 2020 with a torrent of lies. He declared at 2 a.m. after election night that “a fraud on the American public” had taken place by election workers counting the pro-Biden mail ballots after counting the more pro-Trump in-person votes.

Advertisement

“Frankly, we did win this election,” he added. It was the first step in what would become the Big Lie of his attempt to deny, and overturn, the election. He first sought to block the counting of the mail ballots and, when that failed, to prevent states he lost from being counted in the Electoral College vote, which culminated in the attack on the Capitol he fomented on Jan. 6, 2021.

Today, those same dynamics remain in effect in many of the key swing states, although there have been some changes.

Former President Barack Obama holds hands with Vice President and Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris during a campaign rally in Clarkston, Georgia. DREW ANGERER via Getty Images

The biggest change is obvious: Far fewer voters in key states are casting mail ballots than in 2020. This could make reporting results quicker in some of these states. On the other hand, some states — specifically Republicans in those states — continue to disallow mail ballots to be processed and counted prior to Election Day. That makes the count slower and helps produce the conditions for the red mirage and blue shift.

This is how and when (eastern time) polls in each of the seven swing states close — and what factors will determine when we learn which ones ultimately tilted for either Vice President Kamala Harris or Trump.

Advertisement

7 p.m.: Georgia

The swing state with the earliest poll closing time was also one of the last to be decided in 2020. Georgia officials declared Biden the winner of the state on Nov. 19 — two weeks after the election. After multiple audits, state officials determined Biden beat Trump by just 11,779 votes.

The long wait for a final result back then was driven by the pandemic-induced deluge of mail ballots and the razor-thin margin.

Georgians cast a record 1.3 million ballots by mail in 2020. So far this year, that number is way down, with slightly more than 300,000 mail ballots requested. These ballots can be processed prior to Election Day and counted beginning at 7 a.m. on Election Day. This could speed up the reporting and projection of a final result, but, if that result is as close as it was in 2020, that speed will depend on how many mail ballots are returned on or just before Election Day. With days left before the election, less than 45% of mail ballots have been returned, according to the University of Florida’s Election Lab.

Another sign for who will win an Electoral College majority may come from a state not currently seen as a decisive swing state. Florida also reports its results at 7 p.m. and, because it allows mail ballots to be processed and counted before Election Day, it is highly efficient in reporting full results. If Florida — which swung for Trump in 2016 and 2020 — is too close to call at this point, it’s almost a given that Harris is having a good night.

7:30 p.m.: North Carolina

Like Georgia, the winner of the North Carolina presidential race in 2020 was not called for a week after election day. Trump won it narrowly by about 74,000 votes. What delayed the final tally back then was, like in Georgia, the large number of mail ballots and the narrow margin between the candidates.

Advertisement

But mail voting is down significantly from four years ago, with around 413,000 ballots requested this year compared to a little more than 977,000 returned and accepted in 2020.

However, North Carolina Republicans have also heavily restricted the ability of election workers to process and count not only mail ballots, but in-person early votes via new laws passed in 2023. Where election workers could previously process and count both mail ballots and in-person early votes before Election Day, they now must wait to do both until the polls close at 7:30 p.m. on Election Day. This is significant, as a huge chunk of the state’s vote count comes from early in-person voting. So far, nearly 1.9 million North Carolinians have voted early in-person — or around one-third of the state’s total turnout in 2020.

Former President and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump dances as he leaves the stage after a campaign rally in State College, Pennsylvania. CHARLY TRIBALLEAU via Getty Images

“Those who watch election results in North Carolina have come to expect a large chunk of results very soon after polls close,” Karen Brinson Bell, executive director of the North Carolina State Board of Elections, said in a statement in February. “That will not happen this year.”

One other change made in North Carolina that will affect when a winner will be declared is to the mail ballot receipt deadline. In 2020, mail ballots in the state could be counted if they were postmarked on or before Election Day and received within the next nine days. Republicans in the state legislature, however, required that mail ballots only be counted if they are received prior to the close of polls on Election Day.

Advertisement

The possibility of outstanding ballots stuck in the mail for nine days after the election is one reason why Trump was not declared the winner until 10 days after Election Day. That can’t happen this time.

8 p.m.: Pennsylvania

Pennsylvania delivered the necessary electoral votes for Biden to officially clinch the race in 2020 when it was finally called four days after the election. Like many other states, it took time to project a winner in the state due to heavy mail voting during the pandemic, and because Republicans refused to change the law to allow election officials process and count ballots before Election Day.

Republicans in the state legislature have maintained that stance. State Senate Republicans refused to consider a bill to allow pre-Election Day ballot processing that had passed the Democratic-controlled House on a party line vote in May, meaning officials can only start counting ballots after polls close on Election Day.

So far, Pennsylvania voters have requested more than 2 million mail ballots. That’s down from 3 million in 2020, but is still a lot for election officials to process beginning on Election Day. This means that vote-counting could take time in the state many view as the keystone for the electoral college winner. Unless Harris or Trump runs away with the state, don’t expect a call on election night.

9 p.m.: Arizona, Michigan, Wisconsin

In 2020, Michigan was called for Biden in the evening of the Wednesday after Election Day. Among the swing states that year, Michigan counted its crush of mail ballots somewhat faster because poll workers in some cities could process those ballots beginning the day before the election. Poll workers in Michigan should be able to count ballots even faster this time after voters and Democratic Party legislators enacted sweeping constitutional amendments and laws reforming the state’s election code in response to Trump’s effort to undo the state’s election.

Advertisement

Kamala Harris arrives to speak during a tour of the Corning, Inc. Hemlock Semiconductor headquarters in Hemlock, Michigan. JEFF KOWALSKY via Getty Images

The most crucial change among them is that large jurisdictions can now begin processing and tabulating mail ballots up to eight days before the election. This means that Wayne County, home to Detroit, can pre-process ballots early to allow them to be quickly counted on election night after the polls close, which is at 8 p.m. for most of the state, but 9 p.m. for a small part of the upper western portion.

Election workers already did this in Wayne County during a primary election in August. The county was able to report up to 80% of its mail ballots by 10:30 p.m. on election night thanks to this change, according to VoteBeat.

This should allow the state’s reporting to avoid the optics of an extremely lopsided overnight Blue Shift (not that there’s actually anything wrong with that) that Trump and Republicans used for their false claims of fraud.

Another change that should speed things along in Michigan is the expansion of in-person early voting. Although voters could vote early in person in 2020, they had to do so with an absentee ballot that would be subject to the same limitations on processing and tabulating as mailed ballots. Now, early in-person votes can be immediately scanned into the system on Election Day and reported as soon as the polls close.

Advertisement

Wisconsin, on the other hand, made no such changes. That’s largely due to the fact that Wisconsin’s legislature remains firmly in the hands of Republicans, who, for whatever reason, do not want to speed up the counting of ballots on Election Day.

In 2020, Wisconsin was called for Biden in the afternoon of the day after Election Day — a few hours before Michigan. The number of mail ballots should be lower this year than in 2020, but the counting process will be the same. That could delay the reporting of a winner until the next day if the election is as close as it was in 2020 or 2016, both years in which the state was decided by under a point and a half.

Determining a winner in Arizona, however, may take longer. In 2020, Biden was projected to win the state in the afternoon on the day after the election, but other calls in recent close races in the state have not been so quick. The Senate race between then-Democrat Kyrsten Sinema and Republican Martha McSally in 2018 took a week to resolve. It took six days after the 2022 gubernatorial election before Gov. Katie Hobbs, a Democrat, was declared the winner over Republican Kari Lake.

The main reason why election calls can be drawn out in Arizona is because a very large portion of the state’s voters hand-deliver their absentee ballots — which they call “early ballots” — on Election Day. These “late early ballots” accounted for nearly 20% of all votes cast in Maricopa County, the state’s most populous county, in 2022. Arizona law requires election workers to wait to open and process these ballots until the polls close and all voters have left the polling location. This can delay this process from beginning for an hour or more.

People vote on the first day of in-person early voting at Desert Breeze Community Center on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Ethan Miller via Getty Images

Advertisement

Arizona Republicans added an additional step in February that will likely draw out this process even further. County election officials now must count and report the number of ballots at the voting location before those ballots are then transported to a central processing location.

For these reasons, Maricopa County supervisors warned that achieving a full count of the likely 2 million-plus votes counted there will take between 10 and 13 days. That doesn’t mean it won’t be possible for the press to project a winner before then, but don’t hold your breath.

10 p.m.: Nevada

Nevada is the final swing state to see its polls close on election night. The race there is expected to be extremely close, and a call for a winner is highly unlikely for a few days after the election.

The state adopted all-mail voting with in-person options following the pandemic, which means that, like Arizona, ballots received on or after Election Day will take time to process and count. Nevada also allows ballots postmarked by Election Day to count if they are received within four days of the election. So, while election officials can open and process ballots prior to Election Day, these late ballots could push any call in a tight race off for days.

That is what has happened in many of the top-billed statewide elections. In 2020, Biden was declared winner of the state a few hours after Pennsylvania delivered him the Electoral College win four days following the election. The 2022 gubernatorial race between Democrat Steve Sisolak and Republican Joe Lombardo was similarly not decided in Lombardo’s favor for four days. Meanwhile, Sen. Catherine Cortez Masto (D) was not declared the winner of her race against Republican Adam Laxalt until five days after Election Day in 2022.

Advertisement
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Former President Donald Trump took a detour during his speech in Wisconsin on Friday to joke about star Bucks player Giannis Antetokounmpo’s heritage as a Greek national with Nigerian parents.

“Who has more Greek in him? The Greek or me?” Trump asked the audience, which reacted with a smattering of applause.

Advertisement

Antetokounmpo, a Black center who rose to fame in the NBA over the last decade as one of the sport’s greatest players of all time, earned the nickname “Greek Freak” on the court. He has, however, discussed how his background complicated his early years, as he was made to feel like he did not truly belong in either Nigerian or Greek culture, despite being born in Athens.

Three of Antetokounmpo’s brothers have also been drafted into the NBA.

Giannis Antetokounmpo dunks and scores against the Boston Celtics on Oct. 28. Brian Fluharty via Getty Images

In commenting on the player’s race and immigrant story, Trump evoked his mockery of opponent Vice President Kamala Harris, having repeatedly challenged her multiracial background as the child of Black and Indian parents.

It’s worth noting that Trump has no Greek ancestry. His family is of German and Scottish heritage.

Trump: Your team is very good. I would say the Greek is a seriously good player, do you agree? And tell me, who has more Greek in him? The Greek or me? I think we have about the same right? pic.twitter.com/axhaziqNta — Acyn (@Acyn) November 2, 2024

Advertisement

He pivoted from complaining about the microphone he was given to use onstage to acknowledge that the venue, Milwaukee’s Fiserv Forum, is the home of the Bucks.

“Your team is very good,” Trump began. “I would say the Greek is a seriously good player, do you agree? And tell me, who has more Greek in him? The Greek or me? I think we have about the same, right?”

The same — that is to say, none.

Trump went on to praise Antetokounmpo as “maybe the best player in the NBA.”
Washington CNN —

Donald Trump told lie after lie in his speech on election night in 2020. With the former president running again in 2024, here are 12 possible falsehoods to watch out for on this week’s election night – and perhaps the following days, too.

False declarations of victory

As the votes were still being counted on election night in 2020, Trump wrongly declared that he was the winner of various swing states it turned out he lost – and that he was the winner of the election it turned out he lost.

Fact-checker’s tip: Don’t trust any candidate’s own declarations of victory. Instead, wait for major media outlets’ unofficial projections (popularly known as “calls”) of the winner of each state and the election.

False claims that Harris couldn’t possibly have won legitimately

It’s very possible that Trump wins this election. But if Vice President Kamala Harris wins, Trump might well revive his pre-November false claims that the only way Harris could possibly prevail is through cheating.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that this claim is nonsense. Opinion polls have consistently found that Trump and Harris are locked in a close race. It could be won, fair and square, by either of them.

False claims that out-of-context videos show nefarious behavior

Social media is awash in posts that misleadingly describe what is happening in election-related videos. In 2020 and beyond, for example, Trump and his allies claimed that a video had captured flagrant illegality by two Georgia election workers who were actually doing nothing wrong.

Fact-checker’s tip: Before you believe that a video shows what a caption on social media claims it shows, seek information from the feeds of state and local elections authorities and state and local journalists.

False claims that good-faith errors were malicious

In 2020, a small Michigan county made an error in its initial reporting of the votes, reporting Trump votes as if they were Biden votes – and Trump and his allies used that mistake, which was promptly corrected, as a primary basis for a sprawling conspiracy theory baselessly alleging that voting technology had been rigged to steal the election.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that there is always a smattering of initial mistakes when counties around the country are processing and reporting more than 150 million votes. Human error is always more likely than a conspiracy; seek proof before attributing these errors to malicious intent.

False claims that Democratic-dominated cities engage in massive cheating

Trump has falsely claimed for years that overwhelmingly Democratic cities with large Black populations, such as Philadelphia, Detroit, Milwaukee and Atlanta, are rife with election fraud.

Fact-checker’s tip: Demand proof for any such claims made in 2024. Know there was no evidence of any widespread voter fraud, or any cheating by the elections authorities, in any Democratic-dominated city or state in 2020.

False claims that normal late-night reporting of votes is suspicious

Trump has repeatedly claimed that there was something amiss about supposed “dumps” of votes in the overnight hours of election night in 2020. In reality, those were just normal votes being counted as usual and added to the public totals as soon as possible.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that counting votes takes time, especially in populous urban counties with large numbers of voters, and that it’s standard, not suspicious, for some votes to be reported after midnight on election night. Also know that Republican state senators in the swing states of Wisconsin and Pennsylvania declined to pass legislative proposals between last election and this election that would have allowed for a faster count.

False claims that vote-counting after Election Day is suspicious

Trump, who infamously called in 2020 to “STOP THE COUNT” when the count showed him with temporary leads over Biden, has sometimes baselessly called into question the legitimacy of counting votes after election night.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that the count always continues after election night. While media outlets often “call” races on election night, those “calls” are unofficial projections based on incomplete data. The official count proceeds until all valid votes are counted.

False claims that mail-in ballots are rife with fraud

Trump has for four years made false claims about mail-in ballots, wrongly claiming they are rife with fraud.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that there is no evidence of widespread fraud with mail-in ballots; while experts say there is marginally more fraud with these ballots than with in-person voting, it’s still a minuscule percentage of votes. Also, Trump himself encouraged supporters to vote by mail this year even as he has continued to criticize mail-in ballots.

False claims that ballots accepted after Election Day are illegitimate

Trump suggested in 2020 that mail-in ballots that are received after Election Day are illegitimate and should not be counted.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that there is nothing illegitimate about these ballots.

Some of them are votes by servicemembers and other citizens living overseas, who get extended return deadlines in many states. Others can also be lawful votes: even some states run by Republicans, including Utah, West Virginia and Ohio, allow ballots from citizens living in the US to be counted even if they arrive a certain number of days after Election Day, as long as they are postmarked by the deadline on or before Election Day. (Of this year’s seven swing states, however, Nevada is the only one that doesn’t require mail-in ballots to arrive by the evening of Election Day.)

False claims that there is no verification of military and overseas voters

Trump baselessly claimed in September that Democrats were using military and overseas ballots to cheat in the election, wrongly saying these ballots are sent to people whose identities have not been checked.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that the identities of these voters were verified by their local elections offices when they registered to vote.

False claims that noncitizens are voting en masse

Trump has falsely claimed for years that large numbers of noncitizens are casting illegal votes in presidential elections. For example, even after he won the 2016 election, he incorrectly asserted that millions of undocumented immigrants had voted in California.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that these claims are false. There are a tiny number of known cases of illegal voting by noncitizens – and nonpartisan experts on election law say such cases are almost always caught, thanks to layers of identity verification built into the registration and voting process.

False claims about voter registration applications in Pennsylvania

In the week leading up to Election Day, Trump has falsely claimed that more than 2,000 phony “votes” were discovered in a single county in Pennsylvania.

Fact-checker’s tip: Know that the issue in this county did not involve actual votes. Rather, these were voter registration applications that were thought to be suspicious and placed under investigation.
Supreme Court sides with Democrats in Pennsylvania voting case

toggle caption Andrew Harnik/Getty Images

The U.S. Supreme Court on Friday left in place a lower court ruling that for now allows Pennsylvania voters to cast provisional ballots if their mail-in ballots have been invalidated.

Since 2019, all Pennsylvania voters have been able to cast ballots by mail, but to have their mail ballots counted, they have to follow strict rules laid out in the state election code. One of those rules requires voters to place their ballot into a “secrecy envelope” before placing it into the mailing envelope. Without the secrecy envelope, the ballot is considered “naked” and will not be counted.

Sponsor Message

Under a statewide notification system, voters get an email telling them that their naked ballot has been invalidated and that “you can go to your polling place on election day and cast a provisional ballot.” Most counties follow that practice, but some, like Butler County, Pa., do not.

After two voters in the 2024 primary election were notified that their ballots would not be counted because they had not put their ballots in the secrecy envelope, the voters went to the polls on Election Day to cast provisional ballots. But Butler County refused to count their votes.

The voters sued, arguing that the Board of Elections was obligated to count their provisional ballots. The Republican National Committee and the Butler County Board of Elections countered that under the state election code provisional ballots cast by those whose mail ballots were received on time cannot be counted, even if the mail ballots were deemed invalid.

In a 4-3 decision, Pennsylvania’s Supreme Court sided with the voters. The court determined that a naked ballot is automatically void, meaning it was never received or counted by the Board of Elections. Under that logic, if the ballot was never received, a voter is eligible to cast a provisional ballot.

The Pennsylvania Republican Party and the RNC appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court to block the decision. They argued that the state supreme court's decision “dramatically change[d] the rules governing mail voting” and usurped the state legislature's role of regulating federal elections.

On Friday, the Supreme Court declined to intervene, leaving in place the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruling that allows provisional votes to be cast and counted when a “naked” mail-in ballot is invalidated.

Sponsor Message

It’s hard to say how many ballots the high court decision will affect or whether it will ultimately impact the outcome of the presidential election. The RNC estimates it could affect tens of thousands of voters. Other election experts say the number is likely far lower. Regardless of the number, Pennsylvania is sure to be a key state on Election Day and depending on how close the race is between Vice President Harris and former President Donald Trump, the decision could be critical in deciding the presidency.
Here are the key Electoral College dates to keep in mind ahead of Inauguration Day

toggle caption Saul Loeb/AFP via Getty Images

Former President Donald Trump's efforts to overturn the 2020 election — culminating with the Jan. 6 riot at the U.S. Capitol — put a spotlight on what are essentially ministerial steps between Election Day and Inauguration Day.

And with Trump, the Republican nominee, refusing to commit to honor the results of the 2024 presidential election, these incremental aspects of the process are worth paying attention to again.

Here are the key dates ahead:



Nov. 5 — Election Day

The end of voting marks the beginning of reporting results. While no votes can be cast after Election Day, many states allow postmarked mail ballots to come in for several days after, and for voters to fix errors with their ballots.



Sponsor Message

Over the next few weeks

Election officials will always tell you that results reported on election night are unofficial. Over the next few weeks, they'll confirm those tallies, add in provisional ballots and ballots from overseas, and deal with any recounts, getting to the official results by both local and state certification deadlines. (These deadlines vary by state; you can see all of them here.)



Dec. 11 — The appointing of electors

This is a key deadline: It's when a state "executive" has to certify the state's presidential electors. (The governor is a state's default executive, unless state law ahead of time designates another official.) According to the Electoral Count Reform Act, which was passed on a bipartisan vote in 2022, this deadline is six days before the electors meet, which this year is...



Dec. 17 — The meeting of electors

The appointed presidential electors from each state will meet in their state capitals to cast their official votes for the candidate who won their state's votes. Together, these gatherings are referred to as the meeting of the Electoral College.

Dec. 25 — The arrival of the electoral votes

The president of the Senate and the national archivist must receive the electoral certificates of each state by the fourth Wednesday in December.



Jan. 3, 2025 — The swearing-in of the new Congress

The new Congress is sworn in before its members count the presidential electoral votes.



Jan. 6 — The counting of electoral votes in Congress

In the election's final step, members of Congress convene to count the electoral votes.

Following the effort to overturn the 2020 election, the Electoral Count Reform Act also introduced a series of reforms to this joint session, such as clarifying that the vice president's role (as president of the Senate) in overseeing this count is "ministerial," and raising the threshold for objections to a state's electoral slates to one-fifth of each chamber.



Sponsor Message

Jan. 20 — Inauguration Day

The 47th president takes the oath of office outside the Capitol.
Support from rural Democrats will be crucial for Harris to win this swing state

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

Jakai Britton was not planning on casting a ballot this election season. When a group of door knockers came to his neighborhood, he wasn’t planning on having a conversation, either. But in the span of a couple minutes, he’d agreed to both.

Britton, a 28-year-old non-affiliated voter in Nash County, North Carolina, was pulling out of his driveway in a black SUV, airport bound, when a canvasser from the organization Down Home North Carolina approached his car.

“Can we get five minutes of your time?” door knocker Alex Cook asked. Her plea for five minutes turned into a plea for two minutes, and Britton said yes. From the passenger side window, while Britton’s car was still running, Cook made her case for why he should vote for the Democratic down-ballot candidates the organization had endorsed. She focused on the way the local races would impact health care, an issue that resonated with Britton.

Sponsor Message

“So, do we have a vote from you?” Cook asked.

“Yeah, you’ve got a vote from me,” Britton said.

To Down Home North Carolina, the stakes of the 2024 election are too high to let a potential voter like Britton go. Nash County is near-evenly divided between white and Black residents, and in recent presidential elections, it was near-evenly divided by its results. In 2020, President Joe Biden won the rural county by two-tenths of a point. In 2016, former President Donald Trump won it by the exact razor-thin margin.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

In the small town of Nashville, where the group canvassed that day, it did not feel evenly divided. There were Trump signs everywhere, and plenty of MAGA flags. Still, Down Home found plenty of Democratic and non-affiliated doors to knock on.

“What I noticed is that there's a lot of people who want to stay out the way,” said Adon Bermudez-Bey, Down Home’s regional field director. “They see the Trump signs, they see what's going on in the school boards, city council. They're just like, ‘I'm going to stay out of it.’ We're trying to tell them there's an organization that specifically focuses on rural areas to pull those folks out.”

Sponsor Message

Bermudez-Bey said Down Home’s platform was “survival,” helping poor and working class people get basic needs met like housing and education. In an election season like this one, the organization is mostly focused on local races, but they endorse candidates up and down the ticket, usually Democrats. Most of their time is spent urging residents — especially residents of color — to get out and vote.

“They don’t open the door all the time,” Cook said. “So one out of 10 doors, you might get someone.”

North Carolina's state Democratic chair, Anderson Clayton, is also focused on turnout this election. The 26-year-old from rural Person County is the youngest state party chair in the country.

“Joe Biden lost the state by 74,000 votes in 2020, which we know is a field margin, and that can come from all of our counties across the state,” Clayton told NPR in October.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

There are potential barriers to getting those votes. North Carolina has some of the most extreme partisan-drawn maps in the nation. The state’s governor, Roy Cooper, is a Democrat, but Republicans hold a supermajority in the statehouse.

Still, Clayton has made reaching out to rural Democrats a key part of her strategy. The stakes are clear: The Tarheel State has more rural voters than any other 2024 presidential swing state.

“I'm not going to win rural North Carolina this year. I'm trying to bring back margins in it,” Clayton said. “There's a difference in trying to talk to rural voters and talking to rural Democrats. I'm trying to talk to rural Democrats this year. People that showed up in 2008 that ain't showed up since because they haven't had somebody to vote for and they didn't feel like their vote actually mattered.”

Back in Nashville, Down Home door knockers make their pitch to another resident. Sean Jones says he plans on voting, though in the presidential race, he hasn’t made up his mind. He said he’s leaning toward Vice President Kamala Harris.

“I just recently went to go see my brother in prison this weekend, and he was kind of on my head about voting,” Jones said. “He wanted me to vote for Trump, but I still wanted to vote for Kamala. So I'm still trying to, like, look into the politics as far as what’s what and who’s who.”

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

So soon before Election Day, finding a true undecided voter can feel like a rarity. But Down Home encounters them all the time, even within their own ranks. Adon Bermudez-Bey, speaking only for himself and not for the organization, told NPR he’s also undecided on the presidential race — even as he led a group of canvassers for an organization that has endorsed Harris.

Sponsor Message

“I don't know if I'm voting for Kamala yet, just full transparency,” Bermudez-Bey said. “But I know that I'm definitely not voting for Trump.”

Bermudez-Bey cited his concerns about Harris’ time as a prosecutor in California, and her support for Israel during the ongoing war in the Middle East. He set a deadline for himself: By the last day of early voting in North Carolina, he’ll decide between Harris or a third-party candidate.

In the meantime, though, Bermudez-Bey said he still sees the merits of a Harris presidency — at least for Down Home’s goals.

“No, it's not going to be perfect, but it's going to be a lot easier for us to organize under her presidency than Trump's,” he said.

The motivation of voting against Trump, rather than for Harris, was in the air a dozen miles away at an early voting site in Rocky Mount, Nash County.

“I just feel like Donald Trump is for billionaires and not for working class people,” said voter Lynn Jones, who spoke to NPR after casting her ballot for Harris.

Her neighbor Donnell Jones, no relation, was by her side. He had just voted for the first time in his life. Lynn said the two of them had had a series of conversations in recent weeks about going to the polls together.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

“I just thought, you know, he was at an age where this just should have happened a lot sooner,” Lynn said. “But I know sometimes people are stuck in their ways, so I didn't pressure him. Just, ‘Hey, let's go vote together then.’”

That resulted in one more vote for Harris.

“I voted for the lady,” Donnell said.

If Democrats win Nash County, and win North Carolina, it will be through thousands of interactions like what Down Home is doing — and on a more casual level, what Lynn Jones did with her neighbor Donnell. The key will be nudging others to show up and vote, regardless of how disengaged or skeptical they were at the beginning of those conversations.

Sponsor Message

Early voting in North Carolina ends on November 2. So far, more than 3.6 million voters have cast their ballots.
Meet the Democrats using porn ads to convince Trump voters to stay home

toggle caption FTW PAC/Screenshot by NPR

Earlier this year, Wally Nowinski and his buddy Matt Curry were texting back and forth about what they — two regular voters with no ties to any political campaign — could do to defeat Donald Trump in the presidential election.

"I'm in California, I could drive to Nevada and knock on doors or something, but I'm not going to reach 5 million people that way," Nowinski told NPR. Curry lives in New York.

The two friends work in tech with experience in digital advertising and startups, and Nowinski was particularly interested in what he calls "sub-prime" ad markets, aka porn sites.

Sponsor Message

Political candidates and their allied PACs don't advertise in these spaces because they don't want to associate their brands with explicit content, making the online pornographic market perhaps the last untouched frontier in political advertising.

According to AdImpact, more than $10 billion will be spent in political ads in 2024 in all races across television, streaming, radio and digital platforms.

While advertising in the Philadelphia suburbs, for instance, is quite expensive, ads on porn sites are inexpensive and have almost no competition. "These ads are like real cheap and it's like weirdly relevant to this campaign," Nowinski said.

The relevance they saw was a market they believe can reach one of the key voter demographics in 2024.

"There’s 3 million non-college white men across the 'blue wall' states, that's a lot of people, and they're probably breaking for Trump like 65-70%," he said. "You only need to make a very few of them change their mind to possibly make an impact on the election."

So Nowinski and Curry did what virtually no regular voters do: They formed a political action committee and raised a modest $100,000. About $25,000 has already been spent in just the last few weeks of October, when inconsistent voters often decide whether to get off the couch or not. Nowinski says their ads have already notched 5 million views.



Simple ads, carefully targeted

One of the hurdles was finding pornographic sites that would allow political advertising, which some of the largest distributors of pornography, like PornHub, do not allow. Then, Nowinski said, they had to be able to target the ads in the seven swing states, but with a heavy focus on the "blue wall" states of Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin, where larger demographics of white men reside.

Sponsor Message

The ads are simplistic: a five second static image the viewer must see before they can hit "skip" to get to the video they’re there to watch. The image has ominous music and features things like a woman in lingerie with this message: "Trump’s Project 2025 will ban porn. Enjoy while you can." The ads also instruct the viewer to "Google Trump porn ban."

Their goal is also simple: Convince some of these Trump-leaning, porn-watching white guys to sit out the election.

"While this is certainly a different sort of approach, it's not unusual and it's smart in some ways, in a lot of ways it's smart to go where your audience is," said Steve Caplan, a professor at the University of Southern California, who is teaching a class this semester on political advertising in the 2024 campaign.

To be clear, Trump has not endorsed a pornography ban, and his campaign has repeatedly distanced itself from the conservative blueprint Project 2025, although it was crafted by Trump allies and it does call for all pornography to be outlawed.

"I think it's a fascinating example of how far campaign advertising, targeting and hyper targeting has evolved," said Caplan.

With $75,000 in the bank to spend by Election Day, Nowinski estimates their swing state ad campaign could hit 20 million views. He also says they'll probably keep the PAC alive after this election, but he's not sure where exactly to take it from here.

"I'll probably keep the PAC alive because there's other opportunities that are like niche efficiency plays, or kind of unexpected angles that I'd like to explore more potentially in future elections," he said.
With just days until the 2024 presidential election, there’s still a lot of uncertainty. But Vox is here to help you navigate through it.

Last week, we asked for your lingering questions about the upcoming election. We then turned to senior correspondent Eric Levitz and senior politics reporter Christian Paz to answer nine of them. Here’s what they had to say:

The polls make it seem like there’s going to be a lot of split-ticket voting this year. How common is that historically, and would the scale indicated by polling be unusually high this year, or is it pretty standard?

—Richard from Dallas

Christian Paz

Split-ticket voting — when a voter chooses candidates from one party for a statewide or national race and another party for other down-ballot contests — has been on the decline over the last few decades because of polarization. Up to 2020, ticket-splitting was getting rarer — but then we saw surprisingly high levels of it in 2022, with voters choosing differently between governor and Senate candidates, or between those statewide races and local down-ballot races.

This year, if polls are to be believed, we might see more of it in specific swing states, like in Arizona and North Carolina. In North Carolina, ticket-splitting is more of a norm — they have a history of electing Republican presidents but Democratic governors.

Eric Levitz

Yeah. That said, there was enough ticket-splitting in 2020 to have really big consequences. Like, Biden won Maine comfortably but so did Susan Collins.

How will Harris’s and Trump’s policies impact the price of groceries?

—Pam from Jackson, Wyoming

Christian Paz

There is some talk about Harris going after price gouging? But Trump’s tariffs...

Eric Levitz

If Trump implements his proposed 10 percent universal tariff — which he would have the power to do without Congress — it will increase the prices of every foreign-grown/produced food product. So bananas and avocados would immediately grow more expensive.

Meanwhile, if he pursues Stephen Miller’s plans for mass deportation, that would create a labor shortage in the agricultural sector and dramatically increase prices. Surprisingly, Elon Musk — one of Trump’s biggest donors — has admitted as much in recent days, saying that there would be temporary hardship from Trump’s agenda.

If Dan Osborn, an independent, wins his Senate race in Nebraska, he says he won’t caucus with either the Democrats or Republicans. How will he get committee assignments? What clout will he have? Do you think he will change his mind after/if he wins?

—Joy from Rockville, Maryland

Christian Paz

Great question. Probably a ton of clout, but not sure how the committee process might work! Eric, would he essentially be like Joe Manchin or Kyrsten Sinema? Or more like a Bernie Sanders?

Eric Levitz

That’s a great question. Clearly, if Osborn wins, he will have done so with the tacit support of Democratic donors and officials, and in defiance of the Republican Party.

One might think that this would lead him to caucus with Democrats — particularly if doing so would give them an effective majority — so as to secure committee assignments. But given that his campaign/PAC is currently airing ads aligning him with Trump and calling him the “true conservative” in the race, I suspect that he sees direct association with the Democrats as politically suicidal. So, I don’t know. Maybe he’s able to trade his vote on a single high-profile piece of legislation for a committee assignment from whichever party holds the effective majority. But yeah, Christian, I think he would be a more pro-labor Manchin.

I am wondering what size victory constitutes a “landslide”? It seems like it can be as little as a 1 percent margin. That doesn’t exactly invoke a landslide. What’s the deal?

—Kevin from Portland, Oregon

Eric Levitz

I guess there’s a distinction here between an Electoral College landslide and a “landslide” as colloquially understood. If Trump had won the popular vote by 1 percent in 2020, he would have probably swept every swing state (because the Electoral College was heavily biased toward the GOP that year).

But it would be a little misleading to call that an electoral landslide, given that nearly half of the country would have voted against him in that alternate scenario. I think that, due to polarization, genuine landslides like Reagan’s 1984 reelection are no longer possible.

Christian Paz

Yeah, it’s helpful to divide between popular and Electoral College vote here. I don’t know if the landslides we used to see in either category are possible anymore, but if polling error works out in Harris’s or Trump’s favor this year, we might see an “Electoral College landslide” that isn’t actually representative of how the public feels. Either candidate could theoretically sweep the battleground states this year and that would result in 312-226 or 319-219 — not that much different than in 2020 or 2016. And we wouldn’t really call those years landslides, would we?

What about the federal budget deficit? How has it affected the economy during the previous administrations of Obama, Trump, and Biden, and what are the candidates’ plans for the future, if they’re even thinking/talking about it?

—Kirk from Austin, Texas

Eric Levitz

The federal budget deficit was mostly economically beneficial during the Obama and Trump years. When the government spends more money into the economy than it takes out through taxes, that increases overall demand for goods and services — and thus, workers.

In the wake of the Great Recession, demand was excessively low for a long time, as households and employers pared back their spending. Deficits under Obama and Trump helped to compensate for this demand shortfall, eventually yielding a 2019 economy in which unemployment was near historic lows yet inflation was negligible.

Under Biden, the impact of deficits is more debatable. The American Rescue Plan’s stimulus spending spending helped prevent an increase in poverty during the Covid crisis, and then spurred a historically strong labor market recovery afterward. But it also probably contributed to inflation a little at the margin. I personally still think that this was very much a net positive: America’s recovery has been stronger than other developed countries, even as we’ve seen comparable price increases. But since we’ve also seen inflation, people can reasonably object.

I don’t think Harris or Trump has articulated a plan for correcting America’s long-term fiscal imbalance, which is driven by the combination of baby boomers retiring and medical advances — both extending life and increasing senior citizens’ consumption of health care services and low tax rates.

I think it’s debatable how big of a problem the long-run deficit is, but our colleague Dylan Matthews makes the case for concern well here.

Christian Paz

I would only add that their plans for the future would both involve more deficit spending, adding to the national debt, though by different degrees. This analysis comes from a more fiscally conservative think tank, but even the highest spending plan endorsed by Kamala Harris would still be about even with Trump’s medium-spending plan.

If Kamala wins, how could she get more Democratic seats on the Supreme Court?

—MJ from California

Eric Levitz

She would need to eke out a Democratic Senate majority, and then a conservative Supreme Court justice would need to retire or die.

Christian Paz

Court-packing is off the menu, and there likely won’t be a big enough Democrat Senate majority if they could get one to begin with.

Eric Levitz

Right now, it looks more likely than not that the GOP will win the Senate. This is an area where Osborn could make a difference though. He’s pro-abortion rights, so he would probably support Harris’s Supreme Court nominees.

What does the future of public education look like under each candidate’s potential presidency?

—Dave from Bend, Oregon

Christian Paz

Well, Trump wants to get rid of the Department of Education, so there’s that. I think his advisers probably would do this by draining it of money and directing public funds to other causes.

Eric Levitz

I think the basic aim is to reduce federal oversight of public education, devolve power to school districts, and promote vouchers that enable parents to defect to private schools. Although some people in Trump’s orbit also kinda want to increase oversight of public universities — to get the “wokeness” out of there.

Christian Paz

Yeah, and apparently it may require congressional approval to actually get rid of an agency, and it’s unclear if he’d have the votes to do that.

Eric Levitz

Almost certainly, he wouldn’t. Probably just budget cuts.

Christian Paz

So it would involve more bureaucracy to make the job harder to do.

Now, for Harris, she is messaging more funding for public schools and a boost in pay for public school teachers. The Democrats have also called for universal free pre-K and funding of Head Start, the federal program that helps low-income kids and their families.

Eric Levitz

She also favors mass student debt forgiveness, and has opposed attempts by conservative states to restrict how America’s history of white supremacy is taught, although it is unclear how that stance would translate into federal policy.

Which candidate as president will be more likely to help Ukraine win the war against Russia? Right now they both seem equivocal.

—Mike from San Rafael, California

Eric Levitz

Harris is definitely more supportive of Ukraine than Trump. In my nonexpert opinion, however, I am skeptical that Ukraine can win the war in the sense of recovering control over all its legal territory. Russia’s advantages in manpower and munitions give it the upper hand in a war of attrition, I think. Hopefully the next administration can help Ukraine secure favorable terms in an eventual peace treaty, though.

Christian Paz

Yeah, agreed. Trump likes to talk about how he would resolve the war in a day, but hasn’t provided a plan or proposed a vision for how. Would it involve territorial concessions? Would the Ukrainians agree to that?

What down-ballot questions may lead to significant changes? I know we’re poised to have over half the population now live in a place where weed is legal, but what other important issues are on various state ballots?

—Evans from Kilauea, Hawaii

Christian Paz

Weed and abortion are two big issues on state ballot measures this year. We have some minimum wage increase ballot measures in California, Arizona, and a few other states. Also in Arizona is a ballot measure aimed at the state’s conservatives and immigration hawks to further criminalize unauthorized border crossings and allow police to arrest illegal immigrants.

Eric Levitz

Nevada is voting on a constitutional amendment requiring voter ID. Though under state laws, they would need to pass the measure a second time in the future for it to take effect.
More than $10 billion has been spent on ads in the 2024 election

Altogether, $10.5 billion has been spent on campaign ads in the 2024 election cycle, on races from president down to county commissioner, according to data compiled by the ad-tracking firm AdImpact and analyzed by NPR.

That total is up $1 billion from four years ago.

Democrats have outspent Republicans, $5 billion to $4.1 billion, from the beginning of the cycle, starting in January 2023. (Independent, third-party and nonpartisan groups account for the rest.)

Loading...

Twenty-three states this cycle have seen more than $100 million spent. But one state tops them all: Pennsylvania. An astonishing $1.2 billion has been spent on ads in the state, the first time in U.S. history that a single state has seen more than $1 billion in ads.

Loading...

Pennsylvania has been a political hotbed in this cycle. In addition to the presidential campaign, which has dumped in $576 million in ads, there are also competitive Senate and House races in the state. The Senate contest has seen $344 million, and that’s not even the most money spent on a Senate race. That honor belongs to Ohio, where about $518 million in ads have run.

Across the country, about $3 billion has been spent on the presidential election, including the primaries. That’s slightly lower than 2020, but that was skewed by former New York Mayor Mike Bloomberg spending $586 million in ads for his failed Democratic primary effort. That was almost as much as the $651 million that President Biden’s campaign spent in the primary and general election against former President Donald Trump.

About $2.6 billion of this year’s total has gone to general election efforts, which started unofficially after Super Tuesday in March.

Since March 6, Democrats — including the Biden and Harris campaigns, as well as outside groups supporting them — have outspent Republicans, $1.6 billion to $956 million.

Sponsor Message

The presidential campaign has been concentrated in seven states. Almost $4 out of every $5 spent for the presidential election has gone to Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, Georgia, North Carolina, Arizona and Nevada.

Democrats have outspent Republicans in each of the seven states. The most, $578 million, went to none other than Pennsylvania. Each party spent more than a quarter of all their ad money in the Keystone state.

Loading...

The amount of money spent in the presidential election is remarkable compared to 2020, considering how much smaller the field of competitive states is and that Florida is out of the ad-spending picture.

In 2020, $371 million was spent in the general election on Florida, an expensive place to buy ads because of its multiple media markets. This year, only $4 million has been spent there.

In 2020, the most money spent was on Georgia. It was hotly contested in the presidential election and had a Senate runoff. But with all races combined in Georgia in 2020, $787 million was spent, almost half-a-billion dollars less than the spending seen in Pennsylvania this year. Georgia has seen the third-most spending specifically in the presidential election this year, $304 million, behind Pennsylvania and Michigan ($376 million).

The biggest spenders in this election include the presidential campaigns, committees trying to elect candidates to the Senate and House, as well as several outside groups.



Here are the top 10 spenders:

1. Harris for President (D) $513 million

Sponsor Message

2. FF PAC (D) $441 million

3. MAGA Inc. (R) $360 million

4. WinSenate (D) $353 million

5. Trump for President (R) $327 million

6. Senate Leadership Fund (R) $224 million

7. House Majority PAC (D) $207 million

8. Congressional Leadership Fund (R) $201 million

9. Biden for President (D) $111 million

10. Harris Victory Fund (D) $111 million

The ads with the most money behind them are from outside groups:

$36 million: FF PAC

More money has been spent on this ad , running since Oct. 22, than on any other. It’s from the pro-Harris outside group, FF PAC. It highlights a man who says he’s “a lifelong Republican” and voted for Trump twice, but is now voting for Harris.

$26.7 million: MAGA Inc.

This ad focuses on Harris’ record as a prosecutor and tries to paint her as a San Francisco liberal. It has run on heavy circulation since Oct. 9 in five of the seven swing states: North Carolina, Georgia, Arizona, Pennsylvania and Michigan.



These are the top-two ads from the campaigns:

Harris campaign: economy contrast

This contrast ad focuses on what Harris wants to do for the economy compared to Trump. The Harris campaign has spent $19 million on this ad and has run it widely.

Trump campaign: cutting taxes
The 2024 presidential race went from deja vu to unprecedented overnight

Enlarge this image toggle caption LEONARDO MUNOZ/AFP via Getty Images LEONARDO MUNOZ/AFP via Getty Images

It can be hard to remember from where we sit today, but when this presidential campaign began, it looked a lot like the last one.



Everything sounded familiar, down to the candidates. There was Trump talking about bringing back glory, and Biden wanting to restore the normalcy of a good and decent United States.



Former president Donald Trump and sitting President Joe Biden became the presumptive nominees for their parties in March making it the first presidential rematch since 1956.



We all know sequels are rarely more interesting than the original, and many were frustrated or indifferent to what seemed like a repeat of what we had already seen before.



Anyone with a pulse knows the last year has been anything but predictable.



And while we can't say what the outcome of this election will be, we can say that Americans have just lived through the most dramatic, eventful, unexpected presidential campaign of our lives.

Sponsor Message

You're reading the Consider This newsletter, which unpacks one major news story each day. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to more from the Consider This podcast.

A last minute substitution

Questions surrounding President Biden's fitness to serve in the oval office for a second term had already been circulating for months following his acceptance of the Democratic nomination.



But the June debate in Atlanta between Biden and Trump featured a performance from Biden that sent democrats into a tailspin. Members of the Democratic party began calling for Biden to drop out. But the president was resolute.



Weeks later, former speaker of the house Nancy Pelosi weighed in with an open ended conclusion:



"It's up to the President to decide if he's going to run. We're all encouraging him to make that decision, because time is running short."



Then, while Democrats were wringing their hands, a major event rocked the Trump campaign when a would-be assassin took aim at the former president while he was onstage at a rally in Butler, Pennsylvania. A bullet grazed Trump's ear, while one attendee was killed, and another two were left critically wounded.



As Republicans fervently united around their leader, wearing ear bandages to show their support, Biden became sidelined with COVID.



Finally, on July 21st, the President posted on social media that he was ending his campaign.



He offered his quote "full support and endorsement" for Vice President Kamala Harris to be the party's nominee, cementing the decision in a formal address two days later.

Sponsor Message

A post-Biden race

Harris would have the shortest runway of any Presidential campaign in modern history. She would need to introduce herself to voters, explain a policy agenda, draw a contrast with Trump, and also choose a running mate.



On August 6th in Philadelphia, she announced her pick, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz (D).



Later that month, the Democratic convention in Chicago came with a rush of adrenaline as the party celebrated the first woman of color to lead the Democratic ticket.



The first and only debate between the two presidential candidates came on September 10th, in New York City.



They debated policy positions – including on the economy.



Trump had one view:



"The polls say 80 and 85 and even 90 percent, that the Trump economy was great, that their [democrats] economy was terrible."



Harris had another:



"Donald Trump has no plan for you. And when you look at his economic plan it's all about tax breaks for the richest people. I am offering what I describe as an opportunity economy."



Trump also pushed a false claim about Haitian immigrants in Springfield, Ohio, saying they were eating people's pets.



That led to weeks of threats and violence against the community in Springfield.



And just five days later, Trump was golfing when his life came under threat once again, as Secret Service agents spotted a gunman lurking at the Trump International Golf Club in West Palm Beach, Florida.



He didn't fire, and Trump wasn't harmed.



There's more to recount of course. Listen to the full episode of Consider This for a refresher on why your blood pressure has been so unusually high this past year.

This episode was produced by Kathryn Fink. It was edited by Courtney Dorning. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
First Gaza, now Lebanon: How support for Israel’s war is influencing Michigan voting

toggle caption Rebecca Cook/Reuters

DEARBORN, Mich. — This city, home to one of the largest Arab American communities in the country, is a city in deep mourning over two wars in the Middle East thousands of miles away.

The signs of that grief are everywhere.

At a funeral for a Lebanese American man killed in an Israeli airstrike in southern Lebanon.

At a candlelight vigil where people bowed their heads in prayer.

And on the walls of a local coffee shop and art gallery, Black Box, covered in the colors of Lebanese and Palestinian flags. Playing cards with pictures of President Biden and Secretary of State Antony Blinken are also taped up, each marked with the words “war criminal.”

toggle caption Valaurian Waller for NPR

Many residents here have loved ones who have been killed in Lebanon and Gaza. They say they feel betrayed by the Democratic Party over the administration’s continued military support for Israel despite global alarm over the level of civilians killed and suffering.

Sponsor Message

They’re trying to figure out how to express this pain at the ballot box in less than a week.



Fractured support for Harris

Back in February, a self-described anti-war coalition called the Uncommitted Movement, led by Arab and Muslim American Democrats, rallied voters to send a message to President Biden: get a cease-fire, stop sending weapons to Israel, or risk losing voters in Michigan.

More than 100,000 voters heeded the call during the Democratic primary and checked “uncommitted” on the ballot.

Today, Biden is no longer the Democratic candidate, and Vice President Harris is at the top of the ticket. However, for those who chose "uncommitted" — the majority of whom have voted Democratic in the past — support for Harris is by no means guaranteed in this key swing state, where she and former President Donald Trump are neck and neck.

All these months later, there is no cease-fire in Israel’s war on Hamas in Gaza. In fact, it’s expanded to Hezbollah in Lebanon. Calls to end or condition U.S. military aid to Israel over the level of civilians killed and infrastructure destroyed have gone largely unheeded.

“It’s such a tough moment. It feels like a moment of impossibility,” said Abbas Alawieh, the co-founder of the Uncommitted Movement and a Democratic organizer. “I'm feeling a certain level of despair, and I'm also feeling the contradictions of that despair being so rooted in the policy of our government to send weapons and bombs to kill people I love.”

Sponsor Message

The unity that was so apparent in February among Arab Americans, young voters and other progressives in the Detroit metro area has fractured, and people are divided on how to express their objections to U.S. policy with their limited political power come Election Day.

toggle caption Elaine Cromie/for NPR

“When [Harris] became the candidate, we made this offer that if you change the policy, then we’ll automatically endorse you, and if you can’t change the policy then give us something,” Alawieh said, his face pale and his hands shaking as he spoke in a Dearborn cafe. “Not only did they not give us anything, they actively worked to push voters for whom this is a top issue away.”

The inability to get anything from Harris has diminished the credibility of this movement in the view of so many in his own community, home to the largest Lebanese American population in the country. Their families hail from the cities and towns being bombed by Israel right now. More than 2,700 people have been killed in a matter of weeks and over a million displaced, according to the country's Health Ministry.

Despite Alawieh’s pain over the deaths of his own family members in Lebanon and his displaced loved ones, he is still choosing Harris.

“I'm looking at Trump's plans, and I know it could get worse,” he said. “Trump is actively accepting contributions from people who want the full annexation of the West Bank. Trump, very importantly, has very specific plans for how he will criminalize our anti-war organizing here in this country. And that is a clear difference from Vice President Harris.”

It’s a choice that has isolated him. Alawieh’s movement didn’t endorse Harris but still warned against voting for a third party and of what it sees as the dangers of a Donald Trump presidency.

Sponsor Message

“I've gotten a lot of criticism from my own beloved community members for this position. Some ask me, what could be worse than genocide?” he said. “I have a hard time figuring out how to respond to that.”



They’re voting for Trump and Stein

People here don’t use the word “war” to describe what’s happening in Gaza, where more than 43,000 people have been killed, according to the Palestinian Health Ministry, aid has been intermittently blocked by Israel, hospitals bombed and people are trapped and unable to flee. They say genocide.

It’s the subject of a case before the International Court of Justice and something Israel denies. Israel says it's going after Hamas which led the deadliest attack in that country’s history that killed some 1,200 people and saw fighters take some 250 hostages, according to Israeli officials.

The International Criminal Court's prosecutor is also seeking arrest warrants for both Israeli and Hamas officials over alleged war crimes.

Now all those voters Alawieh helped mobilize just a few months ago are “being left on the table" by his party.

And across the cafe, Samraa Luqman, a Yemeni American community organizer, is ready to pick those votes up for Trump.

She said she met with former President Trump recently in Dearborn, where he made a promise to her to end the war. That stands in stark contrast to his public statements, in which he said Israel should “finish the job” and criticized Harris and Biden for calling for a cease-fire. At a rally for Trump just this weekend, speakers used racist and misogynistic rhetoric, including Rudy Giuliani. He demonized Palestinian toddlers, falsely claiming they are “taught to kill us at two years old.”

toggle caption Elaine Cromie/for NPR

Asked why, despite this rhetoric, she believes Trump’s promise to end the war, Luqman says he’s more likely to do so than Harris.

Sponsor Message

“Believe him or not, if there is a 99% chance that Trump is going to continue the genocide and I have to weigh it against 100% chance that it's going to continue under Harris, I'm going to take the 99% chance,” she said. “The fact that there is that slight hope means that I need to go with the best thing for my people.”

And she’s not the only one making this calculation. This weekend, several prominent Arab and Muslim leaders endorsed Trump at a campaign rally in Michigan.

Luqman’s children are half-Palestinian, and this year of watching kids being killed is intolerable, she said. She blames the Biden administration and Harris directly for these deaths.

“It hurts a lot. That hurt has transformed into rage,” she said. “I will do everything in my power to ensure Harris loses. Whatever I can do. And, I’m still a Democrat.”

She sees this as a path to building real political power for a community that has over 200,000 votes in Michigan. For context, Trump won this state by about 11,000 votes in 2016 and Biden won by over 150,000 in 2020.

toggle caption Elaine Cromie/for NPR

“If Muslims are credited with swinging an election,” she said, “imagine the political strength we're going to have. Both Democrats and Republicans are going to be vying for our vote.”

But most Arab American and Muslim Americans NPR interviewed around Dearborn said that if they don’t stay home on Election Day, they’ll go with a third-party choice: Jill Stein.

The Green Party candidate has been actively campaigning in Michigan promising to “end the genocide.”

She has no chance of winning, but she could pull a chunk of support from Harris, and the Harris campaign is running out of time to win these voters over.



Some see Harris as the “strategic choice”

In the last few weeks, her campaign has made overtures. Last month, Harris met with some American Muslims and Arab Americans over an hour away in Flint. This weekend, a different group of Arab Americans endorsed Harris in Dearborn. They called her the strategic choice despite their disappointment. Trump, they said, has shown indifference to Palestinian suffering while promising mass deportations and the revival of a travel ban on majority-Muslim countries, known as the Muslim ban.

Sponsor Message

The Harris campaign told NPR she is “committed to earn every vote” and that she has been steadfast in her support for American Muslims “including ensuring that they can live free from the hateful policies of the Trump administration.”

Some American Muslims view this as Harris making a real effort despite having to uphold Biden’s policies.

toggle caption Valaurian Waller for NPR

“I’m not voting for Kamala because I’m afraid of Trump. I see her as a great candidate,” said Imam Mika’il Stewart Saadiq, a Black Muslim leader born and raised in Detroit.

He is one of 25 American imams from across the country who endorsed Harris in an open letter.

“I don't think it's fair that we lay the blame of the mess of eight years of older white men at the feet of a Black woman in our generation who's saying cease-fire now before the president said it,” he said in an interview. “We've seen what Trump can do. We've seen what Biden can do. Let's see what she can do.”

Saadiq voted uncommitted in the primary, but once Harris got on the ticket he got behind her.

“I respect people's righteous indignation and people saying I just can't vote. I'm never going to try and convince a Palestinian American that they should understand my political calculus,” he said. “But then when it comes to Trump and the MAGA beast at the gate, again we ask the question, OK, now are you asking me to sacrifice myself? Because remember, anti-Black racism, usually when you're darker, you get it the worst.”

He shares a parable from the Islamic Prophet Muhammad to make his point. The story is about a boat with lower- and upper-deck passengers.

“We're all in the same boat. We are Americans,” Saadiq said. “People at the bottom of the boat, they want water, so they're like, ‘Hey, we have an idea. We're going to bust a hole in the bottom of the boat and get water.’ If the people at the upper level don't stop them, then everybody sinks. So in this hysterical political climate, there are some of us that say, OK. Don't put the hole in the bottom of the boat. Don't sink everybody.”

Sponsor Message

But with just days until the election and the war expanding, many Arab and Muslim American voters in this battleground state said they already feel like they’re sinking.

This story was edited for digital by Majd Al-Waheidi. It's part of "We, The Voters," NPR's election series reported from the seven swing states that will most likely decide the 2024 election.
is a senior correspondent at Vox covering foreign policy and world news with a focus on the future of international conflict. He is the author of the 2018 book, Invisible Countries: Journeys to the Edge of Nationhood , an exploration of border conflicts, unrecognized countries, and changes to the world map.

President Donald Trump acknowledges SpaceX founder Elon Musk after the successful launch of the Falcon 9 rocket and manned Dragon spacecraft at the Kennedy Space Center in 2020 in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Saul Martinez/Getty Images

Generally speaking, the national security state frowns on its denizens having unauthorized contact with the leaders of America’s main global adversaries. That is just what Elon Musk has been doing, according to the Wall Street Journal, which reported that the Tesla, X, and SpaceX chief has been having undisclosed conversations with Vladimir Putin and other senior Russian officials since late 2022.

These conversations reportedly included a request from the Russian leader to avoid turning on Musk’s Starlink satellite internet service over Taiwan as a favor to Chinese leader Xi Jinping. The Journal reported that Musk’s Kremlin contacts were a “closely held secret” in government, and that even some White House officials had not been briefed on them, though there have been scattered reports in the media about them dating back to 2022.

If true, the story is a matter of concern not only because of Musk’s massive wealth and influence, but because he holds a “top secret” security clearance, as both the Pentagon and NASA have become deeply dependent on Musk’s company SpaceX for space launches and satellite internet.

Responding to Vox’s request for comment, SpaceX’s media relations account described the Journal article as an “incredibly misleading story … based upon completely unsubstantiated claims from unnamed sources,” adding, “As has been repeatedly confirmed by the Department of Defense, SpaceX has worked (and continues to work) in close partnership with the U.S. Government regarding Ukraine and denial of service to bad actors.”

“Were these engagements coordinated and cleared? Was he debriefed afterward?” a former US national security official told Vox, on condition of anonymity. “If I went and talked to Putin without going through the appropriate steps, I would definitely lose my clearance.” NASA administrator Bill Nelson called for an investigation of Musk’s Russian ties after the story was published, while the White House declined to comment.

In the near term, though, it seems very unlikely that Musk’s clearance would be revoked or his $3 billion government contracts be canceled. Whatever concerns national security officials might have about Musk, his companies — particularly SpaceX, which has come to dominate rocket launches and satellite internet — have simply become too embedded in American military operations to cut out, not least because for the moment, there are no competitors in a position to replace them.

As Joshua Ian Rosenstein, an attorney specializing in national security law, put it to Vox, Musk may now be simply “too big to fail.”

When CEOs go rogue

This is not the first time Musk’s activities have raised national security concerns. After Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Musk activated his Starlink satellite internet network over Ukraine and donated terminals for the country’s use. Starlink, which allows users to connect to the internet via its network of satellites in areas where connectivity is low, has been vital to the Ukrainian war effort, particularly for operating the drones that have become so central to combat.

But while he initially expressed support for Ukraine and the start of the war, Musk has not always been happy about how Starlink has been used by Kyiv. In September 2022, he personally ordered the deactivation of Starlink near the coast of Crimea to prevent a Ukrainian attack, saying he wanted to avoid being complicit in a “major act of war and conflict escalation.”

A little more than half a year after the war started, Musk was posting on X that he believes Crimea, annexed by Russia in 2014, is rightfully Russian and should be formally ceded to Russia as part of an agreement to end the war. That’s a direct echo of Russian talking points, and a direct contradiction of the position of the US and virtually all Western governments. At various points, Musk’s company has threatened to withhold Starlink from use on Ukrainian drones altogether, saying the technology was never intended to be used “for offensive purposes.”

Then there’s China. Tesla’s largest factory is in China and Musk has deepened his commercial ties to the country, even as many other American companies have been pulling back amid rising geopolitical tensions. He has described himself as “kind of pro-China” and more than a few critics have noted that his frequent advocacy for unrestricted free speech does not appear to extend to the Chinese Communist Party. Musk has also suggested Taiwan ought to be turned into a “special administrative zone” under Chinese control, along the lines of Hong Kong. (Support for such a scheme in Taiwan plummeted after China’s crackdown on Hong Kong’s democracy over the past decade.)

SpaceX told Vox that Starlink is not available in Taiwan because the Taiwanese government has not given it a license to operate and that this “has nothing to do with Russia or China.”

It is true Taiwan has opted to work with one of Starlink’s smaller competitors, the UK-European company Eutelsat, to develop its own satellite backup. In a recent interview, prior to the Wall Street Journal report, Taiwan’s Deputy Minister of Digital Affairs Herming Chiueh told Vox his government was concerned that Musk “could cut the service [over] his personal opinion, so we don’t think this was a trustable partner.”

Some US lawmakers feel similarly. “The fact that a single individual has been so disdainful of our legal system, our regulatory system, and yet at the very same time so complimentary to an authoritarian system in China, concerns me greatly,” a Democratic member of Congress told reporters this week, adding, “when we think about the the amount of government contracts he has, as well as in some domains, even the potential for some classified work, it is hugely concerning.”

The member claims that while Republican China hawks had also raised concerns about Musk’s activities and interests in the past, they’ve become less apt to do so as he has grown closer to the Trump campaign.

Indeed, the prominent role Musk has taken as a backer of former President Donald Trump’s current presidential campaign only adds to the national security concerns. He’s donated tens of millions of dollars to pro-Trump super PACS, devised a possibly illegal lottery to incentivize voters in the swing state of Pennsylvania, and turned both his own X account and the platform itself into a pro-Trump megaphone. As NBC reported, this has included personally amplifying content that appears to be part of an organized Russian misinformation effort. US intelligence officials have assessed that Russia is “undertaking a whole of government approach to influence the election” and wants Trump to win. (There’s no evidence that Musk knowingly spread Russian content.)

Little Musk does is normal, but it’s important to remember that in general, it’s very unusual for the CEO of a defense contractor to get this involved in partisan politics.The X account of Tory Bruno, CEO of SpaceX’s main competitor United Launch Alliance (ULA), is almost hilariously anodyne in contrast to Musk, consisting mainly of photos of rockets and his grandchildren. Companies like Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman regularly donate roughly equal amounts to both Democrats and Republicans.

This makes sense. These are companies that depend on the government for business, no matter which party is in power, a fact their political activities underscore.

Musk clearly sees things differently. He has described a Trump victory as an existential necessity for the future of American democracy and is certainly acting as if he believes this is so. But even if Vice President Kamala Harris wins, he has every reason to assume he’ll still be in business.

Too big to quit

There may have been no more vivid demonstration of the American government’s increasing reliance on Musk’s space business than the launch of a SpaceX capsule in September. The mission was to pick up two astronauts who were stranded on the International Space Station when the Boeing capsule they went up on experienced technical problems during flight. It was a reminder of just how much legacy government contractors like Boeing have decayed, which has only made Musk’s companies more important.

As for the Pentagon, even as concerns have grown over Musk’s behavior, military commanders have been positively glowing in their views of SpaceX. The company has acquired a reputation for operating far faster and cheaper than its competitors and its partially reusable Falcon 9 rocket has been a game changer in an era where the military is rapidly building up its capabilities in space. In 2016, the company broke the monopoly on military space launches held by ULA, which is a partnership of Lockheed Martin and Boeing.

SpaceX is also a privately owned company, unlike most large defense contractors, which analysts say helps allow it to be more nimble and innovate faster than its competitors, albeit at the cost of transparency (or accountability for the activities of its founder and CEO.)

“Musk, for all of his eccentricities, has done a lot of classic things right,” said David Burbach, a professor and space policy expert at the Naval War College, speaking on his own behalf and not the military. “He hired the right sort of people. He has been willing to stay out of the way, let people do their jobs.”

“When it comes to military space launches in particular, I don’t think it would be practical or prudent for the government to cancel its contracts with SpaceX because it would cause substantial harm to national security,” said Todd Harrison, a former space industry executive now with the American Enterprise Institute.

So far in 2024, eight of the Department of Defense’s launches were on SpaceX rockets, against just two for ULA and one for a smaller company called Rocket Lab. ULA has struggled to keep up, and Lockheed and Boeing are reportedly looking to sell the company.

“There is really no other company right now that can compete with [SpaceX], for scale,” said John Plumb, who served as assistant secretary of defense for space policy until earlier this year.

The US military is also increasingly relying on Starlink for mobile internet connectivity. The military version of Starlink, known as Starshield, consists of a constellation of satellites built by SpaceX but owned by the US military.

Starshield’s satellites are highly adaptable to different military purposes. A recent analysis published by SpaceNews compared Starshield to the iPhone for both its adaptability to different software applications and the degree to which it locks users into its platform in order to use those apps. The publication described it as “a Trojan horse that will enable SpaceX to further dominate the space domain and dictate policy to businesses and national governments alike.”

“I have seen very little expression of concern,” from military commanders, Burbach said. “[Musk is] an incredibly good salesperson. I think his company has actually lived up to much of the hype, but in general, DOD right now is very eager to hear about solutions that can help them leap ahead, particularly when it’s cheaper than existing technology.”

Case in point: SpaceX has reportedly been awarded the contract to build the next generation of classified surveillance satellites for the National Reconnaissance Office.

Just can’t quit you

Plumb, the former assistant defense secretary, said it was far-fetched to imagine SpaceX would take action to hinder the US military, whatever Musk’s views. “SpaceX,” he added, “needs the US government as much as the US government needs SpaceX.”

But Plumb did acknowledge that the military’s reliance on this one company was a sign of larger issues in the defense-industrial complex. “I personally believe it is really important to have resilience in our industrial base, to not be beholden to just one company, but I certainly don’t see us getting out of SpaceX any time soon,” he said. “We need more competition, not less.”

Dan Grazier, who studies defense spending and acquisitions at the Stimson Center, said the fact that the US government is “kind of married to Elon Musk now” is partly a symptom of consolidation in the US defense industry, which has gone from 51 major defense and aerospace contractors in the 1990s to just five today.

“When it’s your sole supplier, then the government doesn’t have a very good negotiating position,” Grazier said.

Could new competitors be on the way? The best hope for disruption may come from Musk’s fellow tech plutocrat Jeff Bezos. Amazon is developing a competitor to Starlink known as Kuiper, which reportedly features some jamming resistant features likely to be of interest to military clients looking to gain an edge on their adversaries’ technology. Its activation has been pushed back until next year, however.

Bezos’s Blue Origin is also developing the New Glenn, which has a reusable booster like SpaceX’s Falcon 9 and could provide some competition for launch business. For the time being, however, SpaceX continues to be fairly indispensable.

What comes next, if anything, will be heavily influenced by the 2024 election. Concerns about what Musk may be telling Putin, or what Putin is telling him, are likely to be brushed aside if Trump wins the presidency. The former president has discussed giving Musk a newly created position in his Cabinet as “secretary of cost cutting.” Even if that doesn’t happen, Musk is likely to remain an influential Trumpworld figure, and his various businesses can also be expected to benefit.

And if Harris wins? Some believe that for all Musk’s influence, he has finally pushed things too far. Ian Bremmer, the geopolitical risk analyst and Eurasia Group CEO who first reported on Musk’s conversations with Putin two years ago, told me at a briefing this week that Musk “should not have a clearance right now. How he got the clearance given some of the things he’s done and said is kind of a shock and, I think, if it were not for an election period, that would have been reviewed and rescinded already.” However, Bremmer also acknowledged that the US government’s dependence on SpaceX and Starlink is a “serious issue for the US, and that’s going to have to be addressed.”

For the moment, Musk is devoting a significant portion of his time and resources to electing a government that’s very unlikely to address it.
You may have seen the political ad featuring three Jewish women talking about the election in a deli over breakfast. They lament the rise in antisemitism, threats to Israel, and campus unrest, and despite honest misgivings about his character, all agree that they will be voting for former President Donald Trump. The key reason for their support is punctuated by a camera close-up of one of the women, who leans forward and says, “At least he’ll keep us safe.” She lingers on articulating the word safe the way Jews linger on the final word of the central declaration of God’s unity in the Shema prayer, echad, which means “one.”

The ad speaks effectively to a central concern in the American Jewish psyche going into Election Day, as we have just marked the anniversary of the collective memory–triggering Oct. 7 mass slaughter in Israel only to be followed by the six-year mark of one of the worst attacks against Jews on American soil, at Pittsburgh’s Tree of Life Synagogue. But it’s not the compounding of these tragedies that is most disturbing—it’s the comparatively dissonant responses to those two events many of us in the Jewish community have received from our allies, neighbors, co-workers, and friends.

After Pittsburgh, my community was surrounded by the support of the larger community, who wrote notes, dropped off baked goods, sat with us in our sanctuary, and wanted us to know that our safety was important to them. The response to Oct. 7 was slower and more cautious. We could feel the equivocation. Although I had multiple conversations with communal leaders explaining why this was so painful for the Jewish community, a twentysomething member of my community told me, “After the murder of George Floyd, we were told to read in order to understand why this was so painful for African Americans and not ask them to explain it to us. Why is the same not true for us?” Then there were the rallies supporting Hamas and its eliminationist ideology. Whether or not the participants really understood what they were saying, trusted leaders and institutions should have. For my community, it has created an unprecedented moment of feeling simultaneously unsafe and misunderstood.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As a rabbi, I have spent my career partnering with interfaith leaders to address all kinds of injustice in our society. This past year has been the first time I’ve taken care of my community and our friends and family in Israel and, outside of that, done no meaningful interfaith work. So in this circle-the-wagons context, it’s not surprising that we would see a resonant political ad depicting three Jewish women in a deli talking about prioritizing their safety.

Advertisement

But as disturbing as the violence in Pittsburgh was, and as disturbing as the post–Oct. 7 abandonment felt, there is something even more troubling hinted at with this political ad: the temptation to give up on democracy as the source of our safety and return to the historical Jewish communal bargain of protection with the emperor, the caliph, and the czar. The bargain with the former president is reminiscent of arrangements with these historical leaders not only because of the idea that one person can keep us safe (which doesn’t have a great track record) but because that safety may come at the expense of the security of others.

Advertisement

Related From Slate A Superstar Comedian’s Trump Rally Set Was So Bad It Made the Campaign Do Something Unprecedented Read More

We have 11 million noncitizens in the United States whom the former president has identified as candidates for mass deportation. Many of them have been in the country for decades, and millions have American children from whom they would be separated. Advisers to the former president have promised that they have learned from the obstacles they faced in his first term and would be better prepared this time to push forward with widespread raids, erecting holding camps near the border, and increasing expedited removal. Those who claim that it’s simply overblown rhetoric or who point to legal, economic, and social obstacles to implementing these threats must understand that not only are the legal barriers this time around much lower, but the previous time the administration tried to do it, just the threat was enough to incite panic. In our local immigrant community, children went to school with “go bags” containing their next meal and the phone number of an adult should they come home to find their parents gone. Our own custodian, who had been in the U.S. for 30 years, was swiftly deported and left on the other side of the U.S.–Mexico border with no money, no phone, and no ID. It was bad last time, and it will be worse if Trump is given another chance.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

So what does it mean for the Jewish community to receive protection from someone who creates fear and dehumanizes these immigrants by saying they are “poisoning the blood of our country”? Is a blood libel bad only when it’s about us?

I am indeed worried about Jewish safety in an era of rising antisemitism on the left and the right, and it has been shocking to feel distanced from liberal-minded communal partners, but allyship is not about the transaction. I don’t show up for someone so that they will show up for me. I show up because it’s right. Because it strengthens democracy. Because none of us is safe unless all of us are safe.

You can’t linger on the word safe without lingering on the word one, but the central declaration of faith is not in one person. The only one we put our faith in is God. In society, true safety is always a shared enterprise realized when we live out “e pluribus unum”: from the many, one.
With just four days until Election Day, Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump have delivered their closing arguments to the American people, and the difference between those two competing visions couldn’t be wider.

Harris looks ahead, with her most enduring campaign slogans calling on Americans to "turn the page" and assuring them "we're not going back." She pledges to enshrine reproductive freedom into law, help first-time homeowners, put a check on corporations that see catastrophe as a chance to profit and ensure that people don’t face financial calamity when caring for their loved ones.

“America, for too long, we have been consumed with too much division, chaos and mutual distrust," she said in a stirring address Tuesday at the National Mall. "It is time for a new generation of leadership in America, and I am ready to offer that leadership as the next president of the United States of America.”

Then there’s Trump, whose campaign looks to the past, whether it’s indulging in his long-held grudges or glamorizing some of the darkest days in American history. At his hate-filled Madison Square Garden rally this week, he doubled down on calling his fellow Americans the “enemy from within.”

“We’re running against something far bigger than Joe or Kamala and far more powerful than them, which is a massive, vicious, crooked, radical left machine that runs today’s Democrat Party,” Trump declared. “They are, indeed, the enemy from within. But this is who we’re fighting.”

Trump has vowed to use a law from 1798 to deport millions of people on a scale never seen in American history. He has sworn to arrest his political rivals and pardon those who tried to violently overthrow the peaceful transfer of power. He has fanned the flames of people’s basest instincts rather than call them to rise to a cause greater than revenge.

That darkness came into focus this week when comedian Tony Hinchcliffe, standing over a podium adorned with the Trump-Vance campaign logo at their MSG rally, described Puerto Rico — an American territory — as an “island of garbage.” Hinchcliffe also made asinine comments about the reproductive habits of Latinos and advanced racist stereotypes about Black Americans.

While the campaign has issued milquetoast condemnations of the so-called jokes, Trump himself has yet to explicitly apologize.

The comments led to a wave of endorsements for Harris from prominent Puerto Ricans, such as Ricky Martin, Bad Bunny and Jennifer Lopez (and, incredibly, the revocation of an endorsement for Trump by reggaeton star Nicky Jam). Republican candidates for office scrambled to separate Hinchcliffe’s remarks from the values of the Republican Party. It wasn’t long before the Harris campaign had the comments cut into an ad.

The hate isn’t limited to the rhetoric; it is mirrored in last-minute efforts by Republicans to box some Americans out of the electoral process.

As recently as Wednesday, the Supreme Court — including all three justices Trump appointed — vindicated this lie by allowing Virginia to continue its purge of more than a thousand voters on suspicion that they aren’t citizens.

Last week, the chair of the Lee County Republican Party instructed 1,800 volunteers with a so-called election protection group that “if you’ve got folks that you, that were registered, and they’re missing information ... and they were registered in the last 90 days before the election and they’ve got Hispanic-sounding last names, that probably is, is a suspicious voter.”

In Texas, the League of United Latin American Citizens criticized pro-Trump Attorney General Ken Paxton for targeting Latino activists and public officials, even raiding their homes, as part of an investigation into noncitizen voting that they say is spurious.

Then there’s one of Trump’s most dastardly plans: deporting 11 million undocumented people in the U.S., a move that would rip families apart and destroy the U.S. economy.

In his closing argument, Trump has reminded us whom he considers American and whom he does not. His definition isn’t truly dictated by papers or legal status or place of birth. It’s amorphous, determined by what can propel him to power. Once he’s granted that power, it’s possible the voters of color he’s courting will fall outside his definition of who counts as an American.

Many elections offer voters competing visions for the future. But this one could determine which of two drastically different Americas we live in.
There have been a handful of surprises in the 2024 presidential election, but among the strangest is just how frequently we’ve ended up talking about McDonald’s.

Donald Trump, for example, spent much of the race obsessing over Kamala Harris having worked at a McDonald’s when she was a student. The former president also held a weird p.r. stunt at a franchise in Pennsylvania. At one point a couple of weeks ago, the Republican even claimed that McDonald’s had confirmed his unproven claims about the Democratic vice president, but like so many of his other claims, this wasn’t true.

But in case this weren’t quite enough, the McDonald’s/election nexus added another unexpected data point this week.

This past weekend, Trump used his social media platform to present the public with a campaign promise he hasn’t made before. “WHEN I’M PRESIDENT THE MCDONALD’S ICE CREAM MACHINES WILL WORK GREAT AGAIN!” the GOP candidate wrote.

As it turns out, the Biden administration had beaten him to it. As Mother Jones reported, it was Lina Khan, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, who actually did what the Republican said he’d do.

The day before Trump’s proclamation, the United States Copyright Office announced a new copyright exemption that will grant some small business owners and franchisees — such as those operating the 13,000 McDonald’s in the United States — the ‘right to repair’ the machinery within their own shops. Back in March, the FTC submitted a comment to the US Copyright Office asking to extend the right to repair certain equipment, including commercial soft-serve equipment.

McDonald’s has long been the subject of jokes because their restaurants’ ice cream machines — which make McFlurries, among other things — have a reputation for not working. The reason why is a little complicated.

To summarize briefly, the machines were made by the Taylor Company, and under existing law, only licensed Taylor Company technicians could repair them without voiding the warranty. The result was a lot of broken machines at franchises across the country.

As NBC News’ “Today” explained this week, the United States Copyright Office has now “granted a copyright exemption that gives restaurants like McDonald’s the ‘right to repair’ broken machines by circumventing digital locks that prevent them from being fixed by anyone other than its manufacturer.”

The policy took effect on Monday.

The larger pattern, meanwhile, is worth appreciating as President Joe Biden prepares to retire.

Trump tried to deliver an infrastructure package, while Biden succeeded on the issue.

Trump tried to advance legislation to address gun violence, while Biden succeeded on the issue.

Trump said he’d use Medicare to negotiate lower prescription drug costs, while Biden succeeded on the issue.

Trump said he knew how to negotiate a series of bipartisan deals, while Biden succeeded in doing so.

Trump tried to deliver record job growth, while Biden succeeded on the issue.

And Trump announced plans to make sure McDonald’s ice cream machines work again, while the Biden administration actually made it happen.
Pushed by public opinion shift, Democrats adopt immigration restrictions

toggle caption Jim Watson/AFP via Getty Images

When President Biden took office on Jan. 20, 2021, he did what he had promised: he rescinded many of former President Donald Trump's draconian immigration policies.

But three years into his presidency, Biden and the Democratic leadership changed its approach to immigration, focusing heavily on enforcement, restrictions, and punishments — a strategy at times indistinguishable from the Trump administration. Their positions have moved significantly to the right in part due to Republican attacks and changing public views on border security.

This has left immigration rights advocates wondering whether Democrats will focus again on providing pathways to legal status for millions of unauthorized migrants in the U.S.

Sponsor Message

"What we are seeing is that the center of the Democratic Party is now adopting the same policies, the same postures, that MAGA Republicans were fighting for about six years ago," Elora Mukherjee, the director of the Immigrants' Rights Clinic at Columbia Law School, told NPR.

Some immigrant rights advocates say misinformation, as well as a record number of unauthorized crossings during the Biden administration, have put Democrats in a position where they have to prove they can be tough at the border.

Add to that: Republican-led states have been trying to regulate immigration on their own.

An "outdated" approach

In the last six months, Biden issued a number of executive actions that mimic those from the Trump administration, including limiting most asylum petitions at the U.S. southern border.

That proposal went into effect in the summer and temporarily suspended the processing of most asylum claims after the seven-day average of unauthorized crossings in the southern border exceeded 2,500.

This was the same rule Trump used in 2017 to ban immigrants from several majority-Muslim countries, and again in 2018 suspending the right to petition asylum for migrants crossing the border illegally.

Prior to 2024, Biden was already adopting some of Trump's immigration proposals: he kept Title 42 in place for two years , a provision meant to quickly turn back migrants to Mexico for public health reasons.

Sponsor Message

Andrea Flores, who served as the director of border management on the National Security Council under the Biden administration, said Democrats continue to use an "outdated" approach first used by former President Barack Obama, and expanded by Trump, "that is all about asylum and restricting asylum, and blocking people from being able to raise asylum claims."

Flores said for the last decade, both Democrats and Republicans have looked at the issue of border security through the lens of limiting or expanding access to asylum.

"But that isn't really a full answer on the challenges we see at the border," Flores said. "It's less about how Democrats have shifted — it's more about why we aren't talking about better solutions than the same policies that have already failed to create order at the U.S.-Mexico border."

There have been some advancements, Flores concedes.

An example, she says, are Biden's policies that have reduced the number of unauthorized crossings while protecting migrants fleeing their countries. The humanitarian parole program for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans and Venezuelans allows up to 30,000 eligible migrants a month to come to the U.S. for up to two years after being vetted.

The idea behind the program is to reduce the number of migrants attempting to come to the U.S. illegally.

According to the American Immigration Council , nearly 500,000 migrants from those four countries have come to the U.S. in the last two years under the humanitarian parole program.

"That innovation, more than any asylum restriction in the last 10 years, led to the most sustainable drop in those people making unauthorized crossings at the border," Flores said.

According to the Department of Homeland Security , encounters with migrants from Venezuela, Cuba, Haiti and Nicaragua between ports of entry are down 99 percent since the program started. Earlier last month the White House announced it would not renew the legal status of those in the country under the parole program.

Sponsor Message

White House spokesperson Angelo Fernández Hernández told NPR in a statement that the Biden administration "has put forward a balanced approach in order to secure our border and make our immigration system more fair and just."

toggle caption Qian Weizhong/VCG via Getty Images

He said the most recent policies have led to a decrease of more than 55 percent in unlawful crossings at the southern U.S. border.

In December, border agents processed nearly 250,000 migrants, a record high. But those numbers have dropped dramatically since Biden's asylum restrictions. In September, the number of migrants processed was about 54,000.

Fernández Hernández said the White House continues to call on Congress to "reform our broken immigration system, pass the bipartisan Senate bill, and provide the funding we have requested for additional border security personnel and resources."

That bipartisan border agreement had initial support in the Senate , but got derailed after Trump persuaded House Republicans to oppose it.

That legislation would have overhauled the asylum system, imposing severe restrictions for those seeking asylum, and would have raised the initial credible fear threshold for migrants. It would have also increased detention capacity.

The proposal would have also created a pathway to citizenship for Afghan evacuees and allies.

But the Democrats' approach has created uncertainty, said Mukherjee, with Columbia Law School.

"There's a real sense of fear … in immigrant communities across the country with the impending election," Mukherjee said. "Because no matter who takes office, we are very likely to see massive changes in the immigration system."

Trump's impact on Democratic policies

For many immigration observers, the positions taken by Democrats over the last decade seem to contrast with the policies proposed by the leaders they once saw as close allies.

Bruna Sollod is with United We Dream Action, the political arm of an immigrant youth-led advocacy organization. Her organization was key in lobbying Obama to launch in 2012 the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, best known as DACA.

Sponsor Message

She says the way Republicans have mischaracterized the increase of migrant crossings along the southern U.S. border has pushed Democrats to take more restrictive actions.

"The Republican Party, the MAGA Republicans, have been so strategic in lying to the American people about this crisis at the border that now everyone believes this thing is happening when it's not," Sollod said.

According to survey results released by the Pew Research Center last month, an overwhelming majority of Trump and Harris' supporters are in favor of "improving border security."

Nearly 30 percent of Harris' supporters back mass deportations, the Pew survey found.

Sollod says she believes that Democrats have been left with trying to be "seen as tough."

"The thing is, you are never going to be seen tougher on immigration than Donald Trump, who has promised mass detention and deportation of people," Sollod said.

Congressman Greg Casar, a Democrat from Texas, says Trump's focus on false narratives about immigrants is one of the reasons the conversation around immigration has changed so much.

"The Democrats' response, in my view, should be to provide a vision of what a functional, orderly, lawful, and humane immigration system could look like," Casar said.

That includes, Casar says, pathways to citizenship.

"The Democratic Party should be able to play offense on that issue," Casar said. "Unfortunately, I think, Trump's relentless fear mongering and scapegoating in the immigrant communities has pushed the Democratic Party into being more fractured on this issue than we need to be."

toggle caption Melina Mara/The Washington Post via Getty Images

Cautious optimism on Harris

Many immigrant rights activists are cautiously optimistic about what a Harris presidency could mean for immigration.

The Harris campaign declined a request for comment and referred NPR to remarks the vice president made in Arizona last month . There, she called for revamping the immigration system. She vowed more punitive measures for migrants who cross without authorization, and called for a pathway to citizenship for "hard-working immigrants who have been here for years."

Sponsor Message

Sollod, with United We Dream Action, said many of Harris' policies don't fully align with her group's priorities, but she said she believes a potential Harris administration could be persuaded to pursue more progressive policies.

"I know it won't be easy, because it never is," Sollod said. "Politicians, I've learned through this work, never do anything out of the kindness of their hearts — they do things when they are pushed."
In the closing weeks of the 2024 presidential election, no issue has animated Donald Trump more than his obsession with CBS' “60 Minutes.”

To briefly recap, Vice President Kamala Harris sat down for an interview with the news program in early October; some of her answers were edited for time — a standard practice in broadcast journalism — and the former Republican president has spent nearly every day since pretending that this is some kind of scandal.

Trump has, among other things, called for CBS to lose its broadcasting license, asked for “60 Minutes” to be pulled from the air, labeled the show and the network a “threat to democracy,” described the imaginary controversy as “the single biggest scandal in broadcast history,” and even characterized the non-story as “totally illegal.”

The network has patiently explained that the claims are baseless and that the editing process was routine and fair. Trump’s lawyers nevertheless recently wrote to CBS News, threatening litigation. Evidently, they weren’t kidding. Reuters reported:

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump sued CBS on Thursday over an interview of his Democratic rival Kamala Harris aired on its “60 Minutes” news program in early October that the lawsuit alleged was misleading, according to a court filing. The complaint, filed in federal court in the Northern District of Texas, alleges the network aired two different responses from Harris responding to a question about the war between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.

The GOP candidate is seeking — I kid you not — $10 billion in damages.

“Former President Trump’s repeated claims against 60 Minutes are false,” a CBS News spokesperson said. “The lawsuit Trump has brought today against CBS is completely without merit and we will vigorously defend against it.”

As a legal matter, the idea that CBS News engaged in “election interference” is difficult to take seriously. The former president recently wrote on his online platform that he has “PROOF” to substantiate his bizarre claims, but to date, he hasn’t shared any such evidence.

As a political matter, the Harris campaign has invested quite a bit of time and energy telling voters that Trump is overly fixated, not on problem-solving, but on vengeance and retaliation. The Republican shifting his focus to CBS in the race’s final days seems to reinforce the Democratic framing: Trump has an enemies list, while Harris has a to-do list.

But my favorite part of this story is the fact that the lawsuit was filed in federal court in the Northern District of Texas. Why, pray tell, would the former president’s lawyers file the case there? I’m glad you asked.

CBS isn’t located in Texas. Trump doesn’t live in Texas. The Trump campaign isn’t located in Texas. The “60 Minutes” interview with Harris didn't happen in Texas. Nothing about this story has anything to do with Texas.

But the Republican’s attorneys filed the case there anyway, and The Washington Post ran a report that helped explain the reason: “The long-shot claim was filed in the Northern District of Texas courthouse where Matthew J. Kacsmaryk, a Trump nominee, is the sole judge.”

To be sure, the official explanation for filing the litigation in the Northern District of Texas is that the “60 Minutes” interview was aired by the CBS affiliate in the area, where some Texans presumably saw it.

But there’s no reason to play games here. Trump’s lawyers wanted to get this case in front of a highly controversial Trump-appointed judge, who’s quickly become the go-to jurist for GOP plaintiffs looking for a legal ally on the bench.

It was, for example, Kacsmaryk who took it upon himself to suspend the FDA’s approval of mifepristone last year, relying in large part on highly dubious studies — which have since been retracted. (The ruling was ultimately overturned for procedural reasons.)

When a federal judge blocked the Biden administration from enforcing a new rule in Texas that would require firearms dealers to run background checks on buyers at gun shows, that was Kacsmaryk, too.

When a conservative group wanted to challenge energy efficiency standards, they figured it’d be a good idea to file the case in Kacsmaryk’s district. When a conservative group wanted to challenge the administration’s protections for LGBTQ+ students, they did the same thing.

It’s as if Trump’s lawyers decided to offer the legal and political world another case study for why reforms are necessary to curtail judge shopping.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) — A co-chair of Donald Trump’s transition team said Trump supporter Robert F. Kennedy Jr. wants access to federal health data so he can show vaccines are unsafe and lead to them being pulled from the market in a second Trump administration.

Howard Lutnick echoed a number of Kennedy’s debunked anti-vaccine talking points in a CNN interview Wednesday, including falsehoods about the vaccine schedule and the disproven theory that vaccines cause autism. Trump has talked often about how Kennedy, who suspended his own presidential bid and endorsed him in August, will have a big role to play if the former president returns to the White House.

Advertisement

While Lutnick said Kennedy would not be chosen as secretary of health and human services, he was not specific about what Kennedy’s role might be. Lutnick made the comments the same day that Kennedy told NewsNation that Trump asked him to “reorganize” agencies including the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, the Food and Drug Administration and some agencies under the Department of Agriculture.

The comments by Lutnick raised immediate concerns among public health experts that giving influence to one of the most prominent anti-vaccine activists in the world could lead to what one said would be “severe health consequences” for Americans, especially children. They come just days before the Nov. 5 election and as Trump, a Republican, and Democrat Kamala Harris are vying to sway late-deciding voters to their side.

Lutnick, the CEO of the financial services company Cantor Fitzgerald, told CNN that Kennedy wants access to data “so he can say these things are unsafe” and that will stop the sales.

“He says, if you give me the data, all I want is the data and I’ll take on the data and show that it’s not safe. And then if you pull the product liability, the companies will yank these vaccines right off of the market. So that’s his point,” Lutnick said.

Advertisement

Former Republican presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr. speaks ahead of a live interview with US commentator Tucker Carlson and former US President and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, during the finale of the Tucker Carlson Live Tour at Desert Diamond Arena in Glendale, Arizona, on October 31, 2024. (Photo by Patrick T. Fallon / AFP) (Photo by PATRICK T. FALLON/AFP via Getty Images) PATRICK T. FALLON via Getty Images

It was unclear what data Lutnick was referring to since extensive data and research on vaccine safety is publicly available.

The World Health Organization has estimated that global immunization efforts have saved at least 154 million lives in the past 50 years.

In recent days, Trump has said he would let Kennedy “go wild” on health, food and medicines. Kennedy has said repeatedly that he plans to exercise his influence over a wide range of policies if Trump wins and said Trump had promised him control over health agencies and told him he wanted him to reorganize them.

Asked about Kennedy’s comments and his role in a Trump administration, Jason Miller, a senior adviser for the campaign said the only thing Trump and his campaign are focused on is winning on Nov. 5.

Advertisement

“Everything after that is after that, and President Trump has made clear that Bobby Kennedy will play an important role,” Miller wrote.

It would be “extremely dangerous” to put Kennedy in a position of power where he could make decisions or have the ability to change regulatory policy, said Joshua Sharfstein, vice dean for public health practice at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

“Removing vaccines from the market would lead to severe health consequences for America,” said Sharfstein, a former deputy commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “We go about our daily lives in the United States not worrying about a lot of preventable diseases like measles because of the protection that the vaccines provide. But if there were to be a systematic effort to use the tools of the federal government to undermine vaccination, children won’t be safe. Full stop.”

Even if Kennedy is given a lesser role where he provides input and comments but doesn’t have control over policy, it could still be damaging, according to people who have served in public health roles in government.

“Advisers like Scott Atlas have demonstrated the significant influence they can wield without congressional oversight, raising fears of misinformation and harm,” Trump’s own surgeon general, Dr. Jerome Adams, wrote in an email, referring to Trump’s former COVID-19 pandemic advisor, a radiologist with no background in infectious disease, who advocated for the widely discredited herd immunity strategy.

Advertisement

Adams said he believed it was unlikely that Kennedy could be appointed to lead a major health agency because he has no medical expertise, it would likely be difficult for him to pass a background check for a top secret clearance and he’d likely lack support in Congress — though Trump circumvented the background check system during his first administration and stocked his Cabinet with acting officials who had not received congressional approval.

Kennedy’s anti-vaccine organization has a lawsuit pending against news organizations including The Associated Press, accusing them of violating antitrust laws by taking action to identify misinformation, including about COVID-19 and COVID-19 vaccines. Kennedy is on leave from the group but is listed as one of its attorneys in the lawsuit.

Republican lawmakers have long enjoyed – and reciprocated – support from pharmaceutical companies, even vowing to dismantle a law signed by Democratic President Joe Biden that allows the government to negotiate the price of prescription drugs for Medicare enrollees. Republicans have argued the law will hurt the businesses and stifle innovation in the industry. But vaccine skepticism, growing across the country, has become deeper among conservatives.

In addition to people’s health and well-being, the possibility that Kennedy’s influence would result in debunked ideas like a vaccine link to autism being again dredged up and wasting time, energy and money disheartened public health advocates.

“Trump helped bring the vaccine to market, and he took the vaccine. ... I don’t know why he’s giving this person this mouthpiece,” said Amy Pisani, CEO of Vaccinate Your Family, noting Trump’s Operation Warp Speed helped bring the COVID-19 vaccine to market, though Kennedy has relentlessly attacked it.

Advertisement

Vaccinate Your Family is a nonpartisan group co-founded by former first lady Rosalynn Carter and former Arkansas first lady Betty Bumpers that has worked on vaccine programs with both Republican and Democratic presidential administrations for the past 30 years.

“I don’t want to go back 30 years to fighting the anti-vaccine movement again,” Pisani said. “To go back in time and waste millions and millions of taxpayer dollars on this witch hunt again is just untenable.”

___
LOADING ERROR LOADING

As Vice President Kamala Harris begins to make her closing arguments before the election, former President Bill Clinton decided to campaign for her by lecturing Muslim Arab American voters who oppose the Biden administration’s support for Israel’s ongoing attacks in Gaza ― going so far as to justify the massive number of Palestinian civilians killed by the military.

The 78-year-old Democrat made the stunning remarks Wednesday at a Harris campaign rally in Michigan, a crucial swing state that has one of the largest Palestinian and Arab American communities. Those communities, both in Michigan and other states, have repeatedly voiced their hesitation to vote for Harris due to her stance on Gaza policy, which is virtually unchanged from that of President Joe Biden.

Advertisement

Clinton called that hesitation “a mistake.”

“I understand why young Palestinian and Arab Americans in Michigan think too many people have died, I get that,” Clinton said to the quiet crowd in Muskegon. “But if you lived in one of those kibbutzim in Israel, right next to Gaza, where the people there were the most pro-friendship with Palestine, most pro-two state solution of any of the Israeli communities … and Hamas butchered them.”

Bill Clinton in Michigan:

"I understand why young Palestinian and Arab Americans in Michigan think too many people have died — I get that, but…"



"Hamas makes sure that they're shielded by civilians, they'll force you to kill civilians, if you want to defend yourself." pic.twitter.com/cYzlsmWTGo — Prem Thakker (@prem_thakker) October 31, 2024

Clinton’s claim that Arab Americans “think too many people have died” is in reference to the more than 43,000 Palestinians killed by the Israeli military since Oct. 7, 2023, when Hamas militants attacked southern Israel and killed 1,200 people while taking about 250 hostage. The Israeli military has also taken Palestinian civilians captive throughout its offensive, and medical experts estimate the Gaza death toll to be much higher than local officials can tally.

In response to critics pointing out the disproportionate casualties and collective punishment ― a violation of international law ― the former president said he’s “not keeping score” but that Israeli forces have to kill tens of thousands of Palestinians because they are allegedly human shields for Hamas.

Advertisement

“What would you do if it was your family and you hadn’t done anything but support a homeland for the Palestinians? And one day they come for you and slaughter the people in your village?” Clinton said. However, this also describes what the Israeli military is currently doing to families in Gaza and the occupied West Bank ― some of whom are loved ones of the Palestinian Americans he directed his remarks to.

Clinton echoed sentiments voiced by right-wing Israelis ― such as equating all Palestinians with Hamas fighters ― that work to dehumanize occupied people so that large civilian casualties are more accepted in the public eye. The former president also argued that Israelis inhabited the land “before their faith existed,” referring to Islam ― a historically inaccurate claim framing Palestinians as just Muslims when they are, factually, a multifaith group largely descended from native Canaanites who have lived on the land for thousands of years.

“Bill Clinton’s racist and ahistorical remarks were meant to justify the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians from their land. The Harris campaign is doing itself no favors attaching itself to that kind of hateful rhetoric,” a spokesperson for the Institute for Middle East Understanding Policy Project told HuffPost.

The Harris campaign did not respond to HuffPost’s request for comment on Clinton’s remarks, including whether the candidate believes his comments will help her earn the votes of Muslim and Arab Americans. It’s unclear what the campaign was hoping to achieve with such a speech just days before the election, given Harris’ ongoing struggle to win the community’s trust in Michigan.

Advertisement

“Rumor has it the Dems want to send Bill Clinton to Dearborn to rally the Arab vote this weekend,” Dearborn Mayor Abdullah Hammoud posted on X. “Do us a favor – stop sending surrogates who have no respect or regard for this community. You’re only inflicting more damage.”

The Biden-Harris administration has provided billions of dollars in weapons to Israel, which has used them to turn Gaza into a wasteland of rubble, sewage and corpses with hardly any health care or aid. The State Department has yet to take action on almost 500 reports it’s received claiming Israel used American weapons to cause excessive civilian harm in Gaza, according to The Washington Post on Wednesday.

Despite pro-Palestinian voters and organizations calling for Harris to support an arms embargo to Israel, she has maintained that the U.S. will continue its military and diplomatic support for the country accused at the international level of committing genocide.
This is an adapted excerpt from the Oct. 31 episode of “All In with Chris Hayes.”

If Donald Trump loses next week, it seems likely that he will try to steal the election — it's something that no one on either end of the political spectrum seems to really deny.

The former president is already lying about voter fraud in Pennsylvania. And things are likely to get worse in the coming days.

With all of that in mind, though, I think it is important to remember that there are already new guardrails in place that did not exist in 2020, the last time Trump and his cronies tried to overturn the will of the American people.

It's important to remember that there are already new guardrails in place that did not exist in 2020.

To begin with, state officials are much better prepared to deal with Trump's potential meddling efforts this time around. As NBC News reports, “top officials in three swing states — Pennsylvania, Arizona and Wisconsin — said they are ready to take local government authorities to court if they refuse to certify the results.”

At the federal level, there's a new law called the Electoral Count Reform Act of 2022. It passed Congress in a bipartisan vote and was signed into law by President Joe Biden two years ago. Its explicit purpose is to block attempts to steal presidential elections.

The law makes it much more difficult for members of Congress to put forward bogus challenges to the state election results, as they did in 2020, and it requires each state’s governor, or another official, to submit their electors. That should stop states from submitting false slates of electors, as Trump tried to do four years ago.

The ECRA also closes a loophole that makes it easier for state legislatures to throw out election results and it puts forward a process to expedite any legal challenges that do inevitably arise. That could prevent Trump’s lawyers from dragging out the process through protracted legal battles this time around.

Of course, that provision of the law also means the Supreme Court will see cases faster — and depending on how much you trust this 6-3 MAGA court, that may not be a good thing.

But, at the very least, it should stop Trump from delaying the results of the election and using the uncertainty to sow more chaos and division.

Perhaps most crucially, the law also explicitly bans the former president's key argument from Jan. 6, 2021. It says, in no uncertain terms, that the vice president does not have the authority to throw out slates of electors, as Trump pressured then-Vice President Mike Pence to do that day.

Of course, I don’t think anyone was particularly concerned about the current vice president, Kamala Harris, trying to overturn the results but it is nevertheless an important safeguard going forward.

There are people working every day to make sure Trump does not steal this election.

All of which is to say that, while there are guardrails in place, they may not all hold.

However, there are people working every day to make sure Trump does not steal this election, one of whom in particular has become an absolute obsession of the right: Marc Elias, a voting rights attorney who helped the Biden campaign defeat most of Trump’s bogus lawsuits in 2020. He's a man who strikes so much fear into the heart of Steve Bannon that the first thing Bannon did upon getting out of prison was attack him on his podcast.

Bannon said, "Every day after the evening of Nov. 5 is going to be Stalingrad" for Trump's legal team if they're facing off against Elias in court.

On Thursday, Elias joined "All In" to respond to Bannon's comments. "They hate me because I fight hard," he told me. "But they also hate me because we have the facts and the law on our side."
This is an adapted excerpt from the Oct. 30 episode of "Alex Wagner Tonight."

With just days to go until Election Day, Vice President Kamala Harris is framing the choice on Nov. 5 as a fight for freedom. At a rally in North Carolina on Wednesday, Harris set the stakes.

“It is a fight for freedom, like the fundamental freedom of a woman to be able to make decisions about her own body and not have her government tell her what to do,” Harris told the crowd in Raleigh.

Harris is framing the choice on Nov. 5 as a fight for freedom.

“And we all remember how we got here,” she continued. “Donald Trump hand selected three members of the United States Supreme Court with the intention that they would undo the protections of Roe v. Wade, they did, and now in America, one in three women lives in a state with a Trump abortion ban.”

According to the final national New York Times-Siena poll, likely voters ranked abortion as the second most important issue next to immigration. Among women, abortion is tied with the economy at number one. That’s part of what’s driving the largest gender gap in our country’s electoral history.

To that end, Trump has spent much of his time on the campaign trail on a tour of the “manoverse:” Speaking on podcasts to the young men who listen to Joe Rogan, platforming angry male comedians like Tony Hinchcliffe and offering speaking slots to misogynist businessmen who have compared the vice president to a prostitute.

Even Trump supporter and former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley isn’t down for the former president’s approach:

“You had speakers at Madison Square Garden referring to her and her pimps,” Haley said on Fox News on Tuesday. “That is not the way to win women. ... This is not a time for them to get overly masculine with this bromance thing that they’ve got going. 53% of the electorate are women. Women will vote.”

And when Trump has spoken to women, he has promised to be their hero, their “protector.” At a rally on Tuesday night in Wisconsin, Trump went on a rant about “imported criminal migrants” and proclaimed he would protect women "whether the women like it or not."

The Harris campaign has a totally different message for these women: Protect yourselves … at the ballot box.

In a new ad narrated by Julia Roberts, the Democrats are reminding women their vote is their voice. In the TV spot, the actress tells voters that “what happens in the booth, stays in the booth.”

It’s more than a tagline. It’s a message echoed by Harris surrogates, including former Republican Rep. Liz Cheney and former first lady Michelle Obama.

Women are casting mail-in ballots, voting early and making Election Day plans to vote for Harris — even while knowing that the men in their lives are voting for Trump.

“You can vote your conscience and not ever have to say a word to anybody,” Cheney said last week in Michigan. “There will be millions of Republicans who do that on Nov. 5.”

“If you are a woman who lives in a household of men that don’t listen to you or value your opinion, just remember that your vote is a private matter,” Obama said on Saturday, also in Michigan. “Regardless of the political views of your partner, you get to choose. You get to use your judgment and cast your vote for yourself and the women in your life.”

“Remember, women, standing up for what is best for us can make the difference in this election,” Obama reminded the crowd.

And it seems like at least some women are listening. Across the country, they’re casting mail-in ballots, voting early and making Election Day plans to vote for Harris — even while knowing that the men in their lives are voting for Trump. Some are even not-so-secretly posting about it on TikTok and making “canceling out your husband’s vote” a trend on social media.

But, with the election quickly coming to a close, the questions remain: How many of these stealthy female voters actually exist, and what does it mean for the overall math when polls close on Tuesday night?
Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris is greeted by Jennifer Bell, as she arrives to speak at a rally at the Coastal Credit Union Music Park at Walnut Creek in Raleigh, North Carolina, on Wednesday. via Associated Press

APEX, N.C. — Georgia’s former lieutenant governor Geoff Duncan likes to talk about a “whisper caucus” of fellow Republicans who tell him quietly that they, like him, plan to vote for Kamala Harris next week.

John Robertson might just be a solid member.

He doesn’t like to talk about politics with friends and neighbors to avoid arguments. He has voted for Republicans in the past. And he is absolutely done with Donald Trump.

Advertisement

Robertson was among the 36,358 voters in Wake County who backed former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley in North Carolina’s presidential primary. Eight months later, he is supporting the Democratic vice president over the coup-attempting former president.

“The Republican Party is not what it used to be. It’s not my father’s Republican Party,” Robertson said as he stood in the early voting line Thursday at the John Brown Community Center. “It’s no longer Republican.”

Brittany Samuel, a 38-year-old nurse, was another Haley-Harris voter in line to cast her ballot.

“He’s a criminal,” she said about Trump, whom she voted for in 2016 but not in 2020. “And I just don’t feel that a criminal should be running our country.”

Samuel and Robertson were willing to talk about their decision to vote for Harris. Many others, North Carolina “Republicans for Harris” leaders said, would just as soon keep their choice to themselves.

Advertisement

At a news conference earlier Thursday in downtown Raleigh, Duncan appeared with former Republican Reps. Joe Walsh and Susan Molinaro, and former Trump White House national security aide Olivia Troye to urge Republicans who similarly did not want Trump to regain the presidency to join them in voting for Harris.

“We know it’s going to be close,” Duncan said. “We know it’s going to come down to just a handful of votes, and we know exactly where those handful of votes are going to come from. And this is certainly one of those areas.”

Duncan added that, given all the Republicans who approach him to tell him that they agree with what he says about Trump but that they will only express that view at the ballot box, he is optimistic that Harris will win.

“I think the whisper caucus is going to show up in epic proportion on Tuesday,” he said.

A quarter-million votes for Haley

As the last candidate standing against Trump in the GOP presidential primaries, Haley became the vessel for opposition to Trump within the Republican Party — even after it was clear she had a nearly impossible path, following her loss in both the New Hampshire primary in January, then in her home state of South Carolina a month later.

By the end of the primaries in June, she had won 4.4 million votes, 20% of those cast. Of those, 1.2 million were in the seven states that will likely decide the November election, which has made the voters who cast them a key focus of the “Republicans for Harris” effort.

Advertisement

North Carolinians cast 250,838 votes for Haley in the March 5 primary, just under a quarter of all votes cast on the Republican side that day. It was the second-biggest anti-Trump turnout in the primaries among the seven swing states, with only Michigan registering higher.

“Republicans for Harris” officials believe that if she can win over three out of 10 of those quarter-million Haley voters, that would provide Harris the margin she would need to win in that state.

In North Carolina on Wednesday, Harris had one of those Haley voters introduce her at a rally — a public affirmation of how important her campaign believes anti-Trump Republicans are to assembling a winning coalition.

Jennifer Bell said she voted for Trump in 2016 because she was a Republican and Republicans voted for their candidate in presidential elections. She said she quickly came to regret that choice.

“Any Haley voters for Harris?” Bell asked from the stage before a crowd of 8,000. “Conservatives for Harris? Yes, we’re all a family now.”

Advertisement

Bell, a 49-year-old engineer, told HuffPost later that she is appalled by what has happened to the party she grew up in. “The Republicans used to the party of intellect, the party of business savvy. That’s all gone,” she said, adding that she makes a point to wear her “Republicans for Harris-Walz” T-shirt whenever she goes outside to spread the word.

“If you don’t want to see Trump elected, you have to vote for Harris. ... Hopefully there was a conservative Republican out there in the crowd that maybe I got to change their mind.”

The overwhelming majority of those who attended Harris’ rally at an open-air amphitheater on the outskirts of Raleigh were longtime Democrats. They said they were glad their candidate was reaching out to the other party.

“I think it’s a fabulous idea,” said Jill Bliss, who is 70 and a retired public school librarian.

Her husband, Bill Bliss, 72, and a retired advertising executive, said he couldn’t understand some Democrats’ anger about Harris welcoming the endorsements of former Vice President Dick Cheney and his daughter, former Wyoming congresswoman Liz Cheney ― both conservative Republicans.

“When Democrats said, ‘No, you can’t forgive him, kick him out’ — I don’t think that’s the right way to do it,” he said.

Advertisement

The ‘shy’ Harris voter

In 2016, the Trump campaign said they had determined the existence of “shy” Trump voters, those who would not tell friends or family or pollsters of their intention to vote for him to avoid criticism. Eight years later, it is Harris supporters who think — and hope — that there are in pro-Trump areas shy Harris voters, people who are fed up with the former president but would prefer to keep that view a secret.

“I equate it to the 2016 stealth Trump vote, which nobody predicted,” said Robert Orr, a former justice on the North Carolina Supreme Court and a “Republicans for Harris” co-chair in the state. “I think in 2024, it’s a stealth vote for Harris.”

A Christian group backing Harris, in fact, has created an ad targeting a subcategory of that group, women whose pro-Trump husbands expect them to vote MAGA, too. In the ad, narrated by actress Julia Roberts, two women catch each other’s eyes in the polling place and, out of view of their husbands, smile and cast ballots for Harris.

Former first lady Michelle Obama at a rally last week in Michigan made that same point. “If you are a woman who lives in a household of men that don’t listen to you or value your opinion, just remember that your vote is a private matter,” she said. “Regardless of the political views of your partner, you get to choose.”

It was a message repeated by Liz Cheney on Sunday in an interview with CBS. “I think you’re going to have, frankly, a lot of men and women who will go into the voting booth and will vote their conscience and will vote for Vice President Harris,” she said. “They may not ever say anything publicly but the results will speak for themselves.”

Advertisement

Of course, not every Haley voter will be persuaded.

Shiva Gangu said he voted for Haley in March in large part because he thought Trump’s various criminal cases — he was found guilty by a jury in May of a felony and continues to face dozens of other felony charges for his Jan. 6 coup attempt — would be his undoing.

“Trump was going through what he was going through,” said Gangu, 48, as the early voting line inched toward the door.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) — Billions of dollars in advertising are raining down on voters across the Rust Belt, Rocky Mountains and American southwest as the two major political parties portray their opponent’s candidates as extreme in a struggle for control of the U.S. Senate.

In three races alone — Ohio, Pennsylvania and Montana — more than $1 billion is projected to be spent by Nov. 5.

Advertisement

The race in Ohio could break the spending record for Senate races. The race in Montana will go down as the most expensive Senate race ever on a per-vote basis. And, late in the game, Democrats are sending millions more dollars to Texas, a GOP stronghold where the party has new hopes of knocking off two-term conservative stalwart Sen. Ted Cruz, an upset that could help them protect their majority.

Republicans need to pick up two seats to capture a surefire majority, and one of those — West Virginia — is all but in the bag for the GOP.

This combination of images shows from left, Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, on Dec. 7, 2022, and Republican opponent Bernie Moreno, in Vandalia, Ohio, on March 16, 2024. AP Photo Mariam Zuhaib and AP Photo Jeff Dean, File

Other races are more volatile and less predictable.

For Democrats, the brutal math of this year’s election cycle is forcing them to defend eight seats in tough states. Losses by established incumbents could amount to an extinction-level event for Democrats who represent reliably Republican states.

Advertisement

The election also will test the down-ballot strength of both parties in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania, the premier presidential battleground states known as the Blue Wall for their relatively reliable Democratic voting history. Wins there by Republicans would dramatically alter the Senate playing field.

All told, data from political ad tracking firm AdImpact projects that more than $2.5 billion will be spent on advertising in Senate races in this two-year campaign cycle, slightly more than the 2022 total.

That includes a half-billion dollars in Ohio alone, another $340 million in Pennsylvania and $280 million in Montana, population 1.1 million, or less than one-tenth of the population of either Ohio or Pennsylvania. The most expensive Senate race ever was Democrat John Ossoff ’s victory in a Georgia contest that went to a runoff in 2021 and decided Senate control, according to data from the campaign finance-tracking organization Open Secrets.

Generally, campaign strategists say Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is polling ahead of his party’s Senate candidates in Senate battleground states, while Democratic candidates in those states are polling ahead of their presidential nominee, Kamala Harris.

That means there is a slice of voters who could vote for Trump but not back Republicans in Senate races — or who could split their tickets with Democratic Senate candidates.

Advertisement

Such splits have been rare. In Maine, in 2020 voters backed Democrat Joe Biden for president and re-elected Republican Sen. Susan Collins, for instance.

Republican strategists said they expect the party’s major super PACs to spend until election day in seven states where Democrats are defending Senate seats: Michigan, Montana, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, where polls show competitive races, but also Nevada and Arizona, where Republicans are encouraged by strong early voting numbers.

Republicans are most confident about flipping the seat in deep-red Montana, where Republican Tim Sheehy is challenging third-term Democratic Sen. Jon Tester. They are also optimistic about reliably red Ohio, where Republican Bernie Moreno is challenging third-term Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown.

Torunn Sinclair, a spokesperson for a pair of Republican-aligned super PACs, said one — American Crossroads — is pulling $2.8 million out of Montana, while the pair are plunging several million more into Pennsylvania.

There, Republican David McCormick is trying to knock off three-term Democratic Sen. Bob Casey in a presidential battleground undercard that both sides say is close.

Advertisement

McCormick, a former CEO of the world’s largest hedge fund, has hammered the message in two debates that Casey is a “sure thing” to back the Biden-Harris administration’s agenda.

In recent days, Casey began running an ad in conservative areas that touts his “greedflation” legislation to pursue price-gouging. The ad says “Casey bucked Biden to protect fracking” and “sided with Trump” on trade and tariffs.

Republicans say Casey’s ad showing Trump is similar to a TV ad that Sen. Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin is airing and speaks to both Democrats’ need to protect themselves against Harris’ vulnerability in their states.

“They’re hoping to peel off enough Trump voters to win,” Sinclair said.

Still, Casey ran a similar ad in 2018′s midterm election when he won easily — even though that ad didn’t mention Trump — while Casey’s campaign notes that he has long split with Democrats by opposing free trade agreements and supporting fossil fuel-power projects.

Democrats, conversely, say they are forcing competitive contests late in the campaign in two red states, Texas and Nebraska. Ousting incumbent Republicans from one or both of those seats could help Democrats to at least a 50-50 split in the Senate should Democrats lose in Montana or Ohio.

Advertisement

In Texas, U.S. Rep. Colin Allred, a former professional football player, has proven adept at raising small-dollar donations in his challenge to incumbent Republican Sen. Ted Cruz. Allred has outraised every Senate candidate nationally, except Tester and Brown.

The ad spending advantage for Allred has been 3-to-2, according to AdImpact, with the Democratic-aligned Senate Majority PAC touting a new seven-figure digital ad buy and a separate $5 million TV ad buy attacking Cruz on a key issue for Democrats, abortion rights.

On top of that, Democrats hope Harris’ rally in Houston on Friday with Allred and Beyoncé can help Allred by boosting Black voter turnout.

In Nebraska, independent Dan Osborn — a tattooed former labor leader who supports abortion rights — appears to have consolidated Democratic and independent voters while making some inroads with Republicans, Democratic strategists say.

While Osborn is running as an independent and hasn’t said which party he’d caucus with, he’s getting support from a liberal super PAC that has helped him amass a significant spending advantage over Republican Sen. Deb Fischer.

Advertisement

In both states, Republicans acknowledge that they’ve had to spend money unexpectedly to shore up their incumbents’ prospects, but they also say they expect to win comfortably.

In Ohio, Brown has tried to personalize his appeal by appearing in most of his own ads and speaking directly into the camera.

“I’m Sherrod Brown and I have a question,” Brown says, looking into the camera and leaning his elbow on what might be a wood-working shop table. “Have you ever heard Bernie Moreno talk about what he’s going to do for Ohio?”

Brown also makes a personal appeal to potential swing voters, saying he has spent his career fighting for workers and veterans and working with law enforcement and “presidents of both parties to do what’s best for our state.”

Elsewhere, strategists expect first-term Florida Sen. Rick Scott will fend off a challenge from Democrat Debbie Mucarsel-Powell and that Democrat Angela Alsobrooks in deep-blue Maryland will beat former Gov. Larry Hogan to fill a seat being vacated by Democratic Sen. Ben Cardin.

Advertisement

___
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
The old people I knew in the South would often warn us children, “You don’t believe fat meat is greasy!” Their point, in case you don’t speak Southern, was that we were acting like we didn’t believe in consequences. Not believing fat meat is greasy was like, say, not believing adults promising to punish our misbehavior would follow through.

Among the consequences of his term was the U.S.’ high Covid death rate (at least compared with Europe) as Trump abdicated his responsibility as a leader

We see a collective disbelief that fat meat’s greasy from people trusting Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump to lead a “Make America Healthy Again” movement. Among the direst consequences of his term in office was the U.S.’ high Covid death rate (at least compared with Europe) as Trump abdicated his responsibility as a leader and deceived the public as the most serious health crisis in a century unfolded. (He did find time to send Covid-testing kits to Russian President Vladimir Putin, though.)

Trump was hazardous to this country’s health when he was president, and you’d be a fool to believe he wouldn’t be every bit as hazardous if he were elected again.

Consider his endorsement of quackery, his embrace of snake-oil treatments and anti-vaccine partisans, such as Robert F. Kennedy Jr. The president of the United States lending credence to the idea that drugs used to treat malaria and lupus would cure Covid helped cement the idea that being conservative means not believing data or embracing the scientific method. (It also put at risk the lives of lupus patients who couldn’t get their needed drugs.)

Trump’s joining forces with RFK Jr., perhaps the country’s best-known disparager of vaccines — and saying he’d consider giving Kennedy a role in a second Trump administration — is a promise to keep inflicting harm upon the public’s health.

Trump’s Sunday rally at Madison Square Garden was problematic for reasons other than the racism on display. It was there that Trump said he’d let Kennedy “go wild on health.” At a previous rally, Trump said: “Let’s go, Bobby. You gonna make us healthy, Bobby?”

Though Trump deserves credit for Operation Warp Speed, which fast-tracked Covid vaccines into existence, many of his core supporters don’t credit him for it; they blame him for it, and so he’s mostly stopped taking credit for his administration’s single greatest achievement.

His fear of losing the “I did my own research” vote led him to make the horrible promise that he would “not give one penny to any school that has a vaccine mandate.” Already — in evidence that suggests that Republicans’ antagonism toward vaccines is contagious — the proportion of children who entered kindergarten without the recommended complement of vaccinations was the highest it has ever been during the 2023-24 school year. And public health officials have been sounding the alarm that this new and unwarranted outrage at vaccines is helping resurrect once-vanquished diseases.

Louisiana’s surgeon general in September railed against mask mandates and “coerced vaccinations” and complained that when he prescribed ivermectin for Covid patients, some pharmacies wouldn’t fill it. His counterpart in Florida has discouraged people most at risk of Covid complications from getting booster shots. Without Trump and his willingness to openly spread dangerous medical misinformation, it’s inconceivable that any governor would put doctors such as these in public-facing public health roles.

His fear of losing the “I did my own research” vote led him to promise that he would “not give one penny to any school that has a vaccine mandate.”

And let’s not forget Trump’s failed attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act when he was president. On Monday, House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La., suggested that if Trump were to win again, there’d be “no Obamacare.” While having insurance is no guarantee of being healthy, vowing to take away people’s health insurance certainly isn’t a strategy for greater health. It’s such a horrible message in 2024 that even Trump’s campaign said Thursday, “Repealing Obamacare is not President Trump’s policy position.” He’s likely still working on his “concept of a plan.”

The nation’s health is serious business, but there’s an inherent ironic comedy to hearing Trump embrace a health message. The former president, who has somehow managed to survive on a reported diet consisting of mostly McDonald’s and Diet Cokes, offered silver platters of his greasy faves to the Clemson Tigers football team when it showed up to celebrate its national championship. (Trump bragged about paying for the fast food himself, since the event took place during a government shutdown.)

This campaign season, Trump’s surrounded himself with people who believe making America healthy again means promoting unpasteurized milk. That is, he’s not only the candidate for those who doesn’t want kids to go to schools that have herd immunity against preventable but potentially dangerous viruses, but he’s also the candidate for those who don’t believe salmonella and E. coli can punish their insides in a way they won't soon forget.
CNN —

Donald Trump said former Rep. Liz Cheney is a “war hawk” who should be fired upon, as he raged against one of his most prominent intra-party critics while campaigning Thursday night in Arizona.

“She’s a radical war hawk. Let’s put her with a rifle standing there with nine barrels shooting at her, OK?” the former president said at a campaign event in Glendale with former Fox News host Tucker Carlson. “Let’s see how she feels about it, you know, when the guns are trained on her face.”

Trump also hurled insults at Cheney, once the third-ranking Republican in House leadership, calling her “very dumb,” a “stupid person” and “the moron.”

Trump’s suggestion that Cheney should face gunfire represents an escalation of the violent language he has used to target his political foes. And it comes days before an election in which the former president — who never accepted his 2020 loss — has already undermined public confidence. In recent weeks, he has also suggested a military crackdown on political opponents he has described as “the enemy within.”

Cheney is perhaps the most vocal Republican critic of Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election, and his role in his supporters’ January 6, 2021, riot at the US Capitol. She played a leading role on the House select committee that investigated the attack, and later was ousted from her deep-red Wyoming House seat by a Trump-backed primary opponent in 2022.

Cheney responded to Trump’s comments overnight, saying: “This is how dictators destroy free nations.”

In a post on X, the former congresswoman went on to say: “They threaten those who speak against them with death. We cannot entrust our country and our freedom to a petty, vindictive, cruel, unstable man who wants to be a tyrant.”

In recent weeks, Cheney has campaigned alongside Vice President Kamala Harris, urging Republicans to set aside party differences to back the Democrat and reject a candidate she says poses a threat to democracy.

Harris, who told reporters traveling with her Friday that she hadn’t spoken with the former congresswoman since the comment, said anyone who uses such rhetoric “is clearly disqualified and unqualified to be president.”

Arizona Attorney General Kris Mayes, a Democrat, on Friday said that her office is investigating whether Trump’s comments are a death threat under state law.

“I have already asked my criminal division chief to start looking at that statement, analyzing it for whether it qualifies as a death threat under Arizona’s laws,” Mayes told Arizona station 12 News.

“I’m not prepared now to say whether it was or it wasn’t, but it is not helpful as we prepare for our election and as we try to make sure that we keep the peace at our polling places and in our state,” she added.

Following outrage over the remark, the Trump campaign on Friday issued a statement, which it later elaborated on, defending the former president.

“President Trump is 100% correct that warmongers like Liz Cheney are very quick to start wars and send other Americans to fight them, rather than go into combat themselves. This is the continuation of the latest fake media outrage days before the election in a blatant attempt to interfere on behalf of Kamala Harris,” Trump campaign spokeswoman Karoline Leavitt said.

Video Ad Feedback Retired Republican judge condemns Trump’s ‘reprehensible’ attack on Cheney 03:02 - Source: CNN

Dick Cheney’s Harris support surprised Trump

On Thursday, Trump also told Carlson he was surprised former Vice President Dick Cheney also endorsed Harris because he had pardoned Cheney’s former chief of staff Scooter Libby, who was convicted of perjury in 2007.

“I don’t blame him for sticking with his daughter, but his daughter’s a very dumb individual — very dumb,” Trump said.

Trump said Cheney is a “stupid person” and claimed that when the Wyoming Republican was in House Republican leadership, “she always wanted to go to war with people.”

“You know, they’re all war hawks when they’re sitting in Washington in a nice building, saying … ‘Let’s send 10,000 troops right into the mouth of the enemy,’” he said.

The office of former President George W. Bush, in whose administration Dick Cheney served as vice president and Liz Cheney worked in the State Department, declined to comment about Trump’s remarks.

Trump continued his attacks Friday, calling Liz Cheney a “disgrace” and saying, “If she had to do it herself and she had to face the consequences of battle, she wouldn’t be doing it.”

Video Ad Feedback Alyssa Farah Griffin calls Trump's comments about Liz Cheney 'unconscionable' 01:32 - Source: CNN

Long history of violent rhetoric

Trump’s use of violent language dates back to his first presidential campaign, in 2015 and 2016, when he suggested a heckler deserved to be “roughed up” and said he’d like to punch another in the face.

Former Defense Secretary Mark Esper wrote in his memoir that while in office, Trump raised the idea of shooting protesters who took to the streets around the White House after the killing of George Floyd in 2020.

“Can’t you just shoot them? Just shoot them in the legs or something?” Trump asked, according to Esper.

He began his bid for the 2024 Republican nomination by telling the Conservative Political Action Conference gathering, “I am your retribution.” Days later, he said at a rally in Waco, Texas, that the 2024 election would be “the final battle.”

And throughout his campaign, he has described those convicted for their actions during the Capitol riot as “hostages.”

Harris has pointed to Trump’s actions and rhetoric — including in a speech she delivered this week from the Ellipse in Washington, the same site where Trump delivered his January 6, 2021, speech — as she tries to court independents and moderate Republicans.

“Donald Trump intends to use the United States military against American citizens who simply disagree with him. People he calls ‘the enemy from within.’ This is not a candidate for president who is thinking about how to make your life better,” Harris said in her Tuesday night remarks. “This is someone who is unstable, obsessed with revenge, consumed with grievance, and out for unchecked power.”

This story has been updated with additional developments.

CNN’s Jamie Gangel, Kristen Holmes and Kate Sullivan contributed to this report.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Palestinians walk through a devastated neighborhood in Gaza City on October 24. Dawoud Abu Alkas/Reuters

Some voters from key battleground states like North Carolina, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania say they want to see a public commitment from Vice President Kamala Harris on taking action on Israel’s war in Gaza before they decide to vote for her.

Halah Ahmad: “Nothing feels good about this election,” the Palestinian-American from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, told CNN, describing the regular feeling of “shock and horror” she feels as she sees footage of people killed and places destroyed in Gaza.

Ahmad said she can’t guarantee her vote and support to leaders until she is guaranteed an arms embargo or an end to hostilities in Gaza. “I feel most accountable to life — that most basic sanctity of life — in this election,” she said. “The only way to operate is to operate from the place of ‘doing what I can’ and if there’s some hope, I have to act on that,” she added.

She said she takes “the risk” of a possible Trump presidency “very seriously,” but argued that there is “no viable alternative to genocide on the Democratic ticket” either.

Ahmad remains undecided on whether to vote at all, “or I may vote third party, or maybe Harris will do what’s right.” If Harris loses the election, she said she would hold the vice president and the Democratic Party responsible for her loss.

Reem Abuelhaj: The Philadelphia resident said she plans to go to the polls and vote down ballot, but “will not vote for Vice President Harris unless, at any point between now and November 5, she publicly commits to impose an arms embargo on Israel or permanent ceasefire achieved in Gaza.”

“I’m a voter of conscience, and a candidate who is staunchly promoting a policy of unconditionally arming and funding Israel to carry on its genocide in Gaza and escalation in the West Bank and the war in Lebanon is a red line for me,” she said.

She told CNN the issue is “deeply personal” to her. The Palestinian-American says she knows people who have lost family members in Gaza over the last year and can’t vote for someone who is part of an administration she sees as responsible.

At a CNN town hall, Harris said she believed that people who care about Gaza also care about reproductive freedom and grocery prices among other things, and may want to vote for her based on those issues.

Meghan Watts: A resident of Chapel Hill, North Carolina, said that to have those issues “weaponized” against her “speaks to how disconnected she feels from what people are really concerned about.”

“It shouldn’t be a choice where we have to either accept genocide in exchange for lower groceries or in exchange for rent to be lowered,” the PhD student said. “It’s an egregious choice to be forced on us.”

She said she won’t vote on the presidency even though she fears a second Trump term would embolden his “fascist/neo-Nazi” supporters “to enact violence against marginalized communities.”

The candidates’ stances: Harris gave a forceful and notable speech about the situation in Gaza in July and echoed President Joe Biden’s repeated comments about the “ironclad support” and “unwavering commitment” to Israel, as well as the need to get the Israeli hostages back from Hamas captivity. The country has a right to defend itself, she said, while noting, “how it does so, matters.” She called out the plight of the people in Gaza, as well as the need to free the Israeli hostages and secure a ceasefire deal, in her acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention in August. Read more about Harris’ stance on the war here.

In the immediate aftermath of Hamas’ attack on Israel, Trump criticized Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for his handling of the war, claiming to Fox News at the time the prime minister and the country overall were “unprepared.” Many Israelis presume that Trump would give Netanyahu a longer leash to use greater force in Gaza. Trump has said that Israel must “finish what they started,” “get it over with fast,” and that the US must “let Israel finish the job.” Read about Trump’s stances on foreign policy here.

The post was updated with more comments from the interviewees and reporting on the candidates’ stances.

Correction: This post has been updated to reflect how Reem Abuelhaj described her thoughts on Harris’ support of funding Israel.
Madison, Wisconsin CNN —

Police chiefs across the United States are making unprecedented plans for Election Day and the weeks that follow.

Many departments hope to be near-invisible on Tuesday itself so as to create no impediments to people casting their ballots, but they told CNN they are ready to intervene — to protect polling places and votes as they have always done, but also to counter rumors and misinformation.

“Me and thousands of police chiefs all over the country are really taking this very, very seriously,” said Police Chief Shon Barnes of Madison, the capital city of the swing state of Wisconsin.

“As we are a battleground state, we’re not only thinking about what will happen on November 5, but in December when the (Electoral College) electorate shows up and they have to cast their vote, what will that look like and making sure that nothing happens to impede that vote.”

Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Chief Johnny Jennings in North Carolina, another swing state, told CNN: “I, as many other major city chiefs, am more concerned about what happens after Election Day and whether people are satisfied with the results and/or the timing of the results.”

The issue has become pressing for law enforcement since the January 6, 2021, insurrection at the US Capitol that delayed certification of the last presidential election. Law enforcement leaders at last month’s International Association of Chiefs of Police conference discussed how to make sure the electoral process could be completed if there was disruption not just in Washington, DC, but in their cities and states.

At that conference, Philadelphia Police Commissioner Kevin Bethel said some court proceedings had been canceled on Election Day in his city, freeing up 400 officers to be deployed. He said they were prepared for any number of incidents — from hoax “swatting” calls to an active shooter — all to happen on Election Day.

“It really has taken what we’ve always done, but never really focusing on voting, and taking those layers and laying them on top and making sure our individuals know what the cadence is going to be on that day,” he said.

The extra officers will often stay in the background, chiefs said, leaving poll security to election officials, unless they are called in to help with any problems.

Why chief hopes for a concession speech

In Madison, Barnes said emotions could be critical.

“We’re in a different space than we were many years ago when it comes to elections,” he said. “We do understand the process, but we also understand that it’s almost like people feel like it’s attached to who they are. And what that means is if you don’t win or your candidate doesn’t win, how are you going to accept that?”

Close battles may trigger recounts and historic legal fights are already being gamed out, which could mean it is days or even weeks before results are confirmed.

Police Chief Shon Barnes plans to spend part of Election Day in the incident response center as well as driving around the city of Madison, Wisconsin. CNN

If that happens in Wisconsin, Barnes said he is ready for people to come to his city to demonstrate, perhaps some taking advantage of the state’s open-carry firearm rules. He’ll be looking to make sure people don’t break laws but he also hopes there will be no violation of what he called “the civility of our democratic process.”

“I do believe that, depending on who wins or who loses, the tenor of the conversation will change. I really believe that,” he said.

“I am expecting a peaceful transfer of power, which is what we normally have, and there are some clues that that’s happening. One is a concession speech. We hope that there’s a concession speech and it allows people to heal and move on and put what appears to be a divided country back on the same path.”

A CNN poll suggested this week that 88% of American adults believed that once votes were certified, the loser of the presidential election should accept the results and concede, but only 30% thought former President Donald Trump would do that in the event he lost. Some 73% of those questioned thought Vice President Kamala Harris would accept a defeat.

“We have put more planning into this than we did four years ago,” Barnes said of election security. “The events that happened on January 6 have really woke a lot of people up.”

As well as training officers on election laws, some of which are new this year in states like Georgia, chiefs have also familiarized themselves with how the results from the ballot boxes go through state electors and then to Washington.

“I don’t see a lot of panic around (Election) Day but I do see some apprehension around certifications, what we’ll have going on here in December,” Barnes said. “That’s where I hear people saying, ‘Well, what if it doesn’t go the way people want?’ That’s not without merit, unfortunately.”

In the Madison incident response center, police officers will be gathered to monitor any crowds or hotspots on large screens all around the room, and also to try to squash unfounded rumors.

“The disinformation worries me because social media moves so fast. One thing could go out and it could be retweeted, reposted and we have to be a part of that,” Barnes said.

His officers will be fact-checking reports or complaints and putting out their own accounts on social media. If a problem is reported in “Madison,” investigators are going to let people know if it’s Madison, Wisconsin, or actually a place with the same name in any of more than 20 other states.

A security camera watches over a mail-in ballot drop box outside the Chester County Government Services Center ahead of the US general election. Matt Slocum/AP

The spread of lies or misleading statements and the potential impact are top of mind in other swing states.

Sheriff Willie Rowe of Wake County, North Carolina, told CNN: “While implementing our standard protocols, we are closely watching for misinformation, social media threats, and potential protest activity to be ready should any local concerns arise.”

In Pennsylvania, the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police said it was preparing for a busy election week as it balanced “the protection of First Amendment rights to free speech and peaceful assembly, while also preserving public safety.”

Sheriff Russ Skinner in Maricopa County in swing state Arizona said he was disquieted by his county getting global attention for becoming a hotbed for conspiracy theories since 2020, but insisted good plans were in place to tackle misinformation.

“We’re very concerned about those type of comments being made and not just from potential candidates, whether they’re winning, losing or what their conspiracy theory is,” Skinner told a news conference.

Before 2020, he would have expected to deploy 40 or 50 deputies on just Election Day, and once the ballots were at the counting center, their work would be done, he said.

Now, more than 200 employees could be assigned on a rolling basis to respond to needs on what will be a multi-day event.

Madison’s Barnes said they didn’t even talk about election security when he trained at the academy 25 years ago.

Barnes, a former high school history teacher who quotes Alexis de Tocqueville on fears about the “tyranny of the majority,” knows police have not always been on the correct side of ensuring all citizens can exercise their voting rights. But even with a visit to the site of “Bloody Sunday” in Selma, Alabama and his studies of the Civil War, Barnes said living and working in Wisconsin in 2024 has given him a whole new perspective.

“Battleground means something totally different to me now.”
Debunking voter fraud conspiracy theories. And, presidential power over abortion

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.

Today's top stories

Conspiracy theories about election fraud have lit up social media as Election Day is less than a week away and millions of Americans have already cast their ballots. There are massive efforts to collect suspicious incidents and frame them as a coordinated effort to steal the election. The "Election Integrity Community" on X is one hub for these efforts. The community is set up by the social media site's owner Elon Musk's super PAC and invites users to "share potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities you see while voting in the 2024 election."

toggle caption KENA BETANCUR/AFP via Getty Images/AFP

🎧 Trump supporters are collecting evidence of voter fraud in an effort to safeguard the vote, NPR’s Huo Jingnan tells Up First. The online evidence gathering involves a lot of first-person accounts of people running into mistakes or things they didn’t expect. A big narrative of this election is that noncitizens are voting in large numbers. “To be clear there have been incidents of noncitizens voting illegally, but it happens in very small numbers and there is no sign that it has affected election results,” Jingnan says. This builds an impression that voter fraud is happening everywhere when in fact it’s very rare.

Sponsor Message

Nearly 40% of women under the age of 30 cite abortion as a top issue in this election. Abortion access will be directly on the ballot in 10 states next week. Vice President Harris has stated that if she is elected, she will restore reproductive freedom and sign a bill that enshrines the right to an abortion. In contrast, former President Donald Trump and his allies have discussed the possibility of implementing national abortion limits often referred to as a minimum national standard. However, Trump rolled that back on the campaign trail weeks ago, saying he would veto a federal abortion ban.



🎧 Harris wouldn’t be able to expand abortion rights alone. She needs Congress’ support, NPR’s Elissa Nadworny says. Even if she could get something passed, she would face legal challenges and a now conservative Supreme Court. If Trump became president, he could limit abortion by enforcing an anti-obscenity law called the Comstock Act. It could be used to criminalize abortion by banning abortion pills and medical instruments needed for the procedure. Once in office, a president could use executive authority to strengthen privacy laws to protect women from prosecution. In contrast, the president could create abortion tracking requirements.

A series of Facebook ads seemingly advocating for Harris are actually spreading misinformation about her current policy positions in an attempt to mislead voters. These ads, which have been viewed millions of times in swing states, are posted by an account called “Progress 2028,” which suggests a liberal counterpart to the Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025. The ads claim that Harris intends to implement a mandatory gun buyback program, provide Medicare benefits and driver’s licenses to undocumented immigrants and ban fracking. Funding for these ads comes from a dark money group backed by Musk and others, according to the campaign tracking site Open Secrets.



Sponsor Message

Today's listen

toggle caption Marizilda Cruppe for NPR

The Amazon River, the largest river in the world’s biggest rainforest, is facing significant challenges. It's seen its lowest water levels in over 100 years due to a prolonged drought. This situation affects not only the river itself but also the wildlife and the people who rely on its water. NPR’s Carrie Kahn visited one of the Amazon's most impacted regions and spoke with local residents who are experiencing the effects of the drought firsthand.



🎧 Listen to how people are impacted by these challenges, what could be next for the river and the sounds of wildlife from the area.

Life advice

toggle caption ST.art/Getty Images

October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month, an annual health campaign that promotes the screening and prevention of breast cancer. This is an excellent time to learn when and how often you should be checked for this disease. Thanks to improved screening and treatment options, breast cancer deaths have decreased by approximately 40% over the past three decades. Here’s what you need to know about detection and screening.



🎗️ Anyone with breast tissue can get breast cancer.

can get breast cancer. 🎗️ Breast cancer risk increases with age , along with factors such as family history, specific genetic mutations, dense breast tissue and alcohol consumption.

, along with factors such as family history, specific genetic mutations, dense breast tissue and alcohol consumption. 🎗️ Get to know your breasts. Changes like new lumps, dimpling of the skin around your breasts and unusual nipple discharge or bleeding can be cause for concern.

3 things to know before you go

toggle caption Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images

Jaywalking has officially become legal in New York City. This comes after the NYPD faced criticism for unfairly targeting Black and Hispanic New Yorkers. Markings known as “witches marks,” which are believed to protect against witches or evil spirits, have been found carved into the walls of a historic medieval manor in England. Starbucks’s new CEO ordered big changes for the chain yesterday including drinks being ready in four minutes or less, no upcharges for non-dairy milk, the return of the condiment bar and more. This comes as sales in the U.S. have fallen for months.

Sponsor Message

This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.
After a chaotic vote count in 2020, here's what Detroit will do differently this year

toggle caption Elaine Cromie/Getty Images

DETROIT — In 2020, what was then called the TCF Center became a tinderbox as Detroit poll workers counted the presidential election results.

A crowd of Republican observers at the center grew increasingly angry as false rumors of voting fraud spread across social media.

Now, four years later, Detroit election officials say they’re determined to avoid a repeat of the chaos that engulfed poll workers.



Fraud claims lit a chaotic fuse

The scene became a centerpiece of Donald Trump’s false narrative that the 2020 election was rigged against him.

“In Detroit there were hours of unexplained delay in delivering many of the votes for counting,” he said then. “The final batch did not arrive until 4 in the morning. And nobody knew where they came from.”

Sponsor Message

But officials in charge of tabulating those election results counter that no one asked at the time why those ballots arrived so late.

Detroit Elections Department Chief Operating Officer Daniel Baxter says he could have supplied the answer. He supervised poll workers who had to wade through more than 170,000 absentee ballots — about two-thirds of all the votes cast in the city.

“You gotta remember we were in the middle of the pandemic. Nobody wanted to go to the polls on Election Day, so they opted to vote by absentee,” Baxter said. “And some of them were a little slower than others in terms of getting them delivered. And that is exactly what you experienced at 3 o’clock, 4 o’clock in the morning.”

But as the vote-counting wore on, the situation deteriorated. Hundreds of people converged on the convention center. It escalated when the hall reached full capacity and certain challengers were ordered to leave.

“I heard banging on the windows,” Baxter recalled. “I heard chanting, ‘Stop the count! Stop the count!’ It was a hairy moment.”

Baxter said it was hard for those counting votes to keep from being distracted. And then things got worse.

“Someone made the bad call of putting cardboard up on the windows. When I discovered that I made sure it was removed,” he said. “I got on the microphone and explained to our staff, all of our poll workers, that we were not going to stop counting until the last ballot was delivered here.”

toggle caption Elaine Cromie/Getty Images

What's changed for the 2024 election

After the near riot, those who game-planned for the next presidential contest hardened their resolve to protect poll workers, says City Clerk Janice Winfrey, who oversees all of Detroit’s elections.

Sponsor Message

“We got through 2020 when all of that happened, the threats and the hurling insults at election workers. And it wasn’t expected. So now we know that may happen and we are ready if it should happen,” Winfrey said.

That includes new security procedures designed to block any Election Day upheavals at what is now called Huntington Place.

Officials moved the central polling location to the enclosed, cavernous Hall A, on the opposite end of the center from where votes were tallied in 2020.

Baxter says there won’t be any banging on windows at Hall A.

“There’s no windows. And if you do not have credentials you cannot be inside in any area. Those folk who decide to be present for protests or whatever, the Detroit Police Department has designated an area where they can be.”

Baxter says the new location is also a smaller and more secure space than its 2020 counterpart.

He says it’s usable because Michigan now allows Detroit to tabulate absentee ballots more than a week ahead of Election Day.

That means fewer workers are needed for each shift because the vote-counting is spread across numerous days.

“We only have 50 tables for processing. In 2020 we had 134 tables. That made for more people, more challengers, more poll workers,” Baxter said. “Now at the table you have 300 ballots that you have to process, versus 3,000 ballots in 2020.”

There are also magnetometers guarding the doorways. Media, poll workers and challengers must swipe a driver’s card, state ID or some other form of identification to get credentials.

And Baxter says officials will keep track of how many people get in.

“A digitized check-in system will contain a maximum number for each group and organization,” he said. “Once we max out on that number no one will be allowed entry, whether it’s the Democratic Party, the Republican Party, the NAACP, the League of Women Voters or whoever they are.”

Sponsor Message

The need to harden infrastructure as well as resolve became glaringly apparent in 2022.

Winfrey, the city clerk, notes there was an incident at a building roughly 4 miles away from Huntington Place, where a GOP challenger confronted a deputy clerk in an alley behind the Elections Department.

“All of our windows on the first floor of our building has been replaced with bulletproof glass,” Winfrey said. “We have uniformed and plain-clothed officers. And the alleyway is now blocked off.”

Winfrey and Baxter estimate with early voting this year, workers will tabulate about 90% of Detroit’s ballots by early evening on Election Day.

That means poll workers should be able to leave the convention center much earlier than in 2020, shielding them, officials hope, from any disruptions by angry poll challengers.
A Good Guy: Under Oath

Enlarge this image Luke Medina/NPR Luke Medina/NPR

All Marines take an oath to defend the Constitution. After Sgt. Joshua Abate participated in the events on January 6, the Corps has to decide if he is a Marine worth keeping. Did he break his oath when he entered the Capitol that day? And what does his case say about the changing narrative around January 6?

As the 2024 presidential election approaches, January 6 casts a long shadow. NPR's Tom Bowman and Lauren Hodges follow the military's efforts to address extremism in the ranks, and the political hurdles it has faced along the way.

LEARN MORE:

View the Report on Countering Extremist Activity Within the Department of Defense, from the Countering Extremist Activity Working Group (CEAWG) at the Department of Defense.

Read this investigative piece from the AP about radicalization in the military.

Sponsor Message

Listen to Embedded wherever you get your podcasts, including NPR App, Apple Podcasts, Pocket Casts, Spotify, and RSS.

To listen to this series sponsor-free and support NPR, sign up for Embedded+ in Apple Podcasts or at plus.npr.org.
covers politics and society for Vox. She first joined Vox in 2019, and her work has also appeared in Politico, Washington Monthly, and the New Republic.

Pro-Trump protesters gather in front of the US Capitol Building on January 6, 2021, in Washington, DC. Brent Stirton/Getty Images

Political violence has reached alarming levels in the US over the last few years.

The January 6, 2021, insurrection at the US Capitol, the attack on former Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s husband, and multiple assassination attempts against former President Donald Trump are all examples of America’s increasingly polarized and perilous environment.

Now, the 2024 election could cause another flare-up, especially if Trump loses. Discussion of violence among right-wing extremists has also already spiked online, and unlike Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump has refused to say he would concede.

Trump has, however, employed violent rhetoric himself. On Thursday, he lambasted former Rep. Liz Cheney, an outspoken Republican critic of the former president who he described as a “radical war hawk.”

“Let’s put her with a rifle standing there with nine barrels shooting at her, okay?” he said at a campaign event in Arizona. “Let’s see how she feels about it, you know, when the guns are trained on her face.”

The polls show a tight race between Trump and Harris, suggesting that this time, as in 2020, the results may be decided by narrow margins in a few battleground states. Trump has been priming Republican voters to reject the results if he comes up short, making unsubstantiated claims about voter fraud in Pennsylvania and noncitizens voting on a widespread basis. Billionaire Trump supporter Elon Musk has also set up a platform on his social media site X, formerly known as Twitter, for users to “share potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities you see while voting in the 2024 election.”

Those tactics seem to be working. If Trump loses, about a quarter of Republicans said they think he should do whatever it takes to ensure he becomes president anyway, according to a September PRRI poll.

That may include resorting to violence. Among Republicans who don’t believe Joe Biden’s win in 2020 was legitimate, almost one-third said in an August poll by the SNF Agora Institute at Johns Hopkins University that they expected “a lot” or “a great deal” of political violence after the November election. More recent polls have found similar results, including an October AP-NORC poll that found 27 percent of Republicans, and 42 percent of voters overall, “extremely” or “very” worried about post-election violence.

All of this has put law enforcement and national security officials on high alert about political violence in the days before and after the election. Earlier this month, a joint Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and FBI intelligence bulletin said domestic extremists “pose a threat of violence to a range of targets directly and indirectly associated with elections through at least the presidential inauguration” on January 20.

What kind of political violence might break out?

Some incidents of political violence have already been recorded in the run-up to Election Day.

Ballots in mailboxes and drop boxes in Arizona, Massachusetts, Washington, and Oregon have been damaged in suspected arson. DHS warned this might happen, based on its monitoring of comments made online in domestic violent extremist circles. In a series of security bulletins in the last few months, the agency noted, “Some threat actors may perceive ballot drop boxes as ‘soft targets’ because they are more accessible” and that some of these actors had discussed a variety of methods for damaging them.

A man was also indicted on terrorism and gun charges for allegedly shooting at the Democratic National Committee’s offices in Phoenix on three occasions since September.

Things might only get worse from here. Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco has warned that the US is “facing an unprecedented level of, and increase in, threats of violence against public officials.”

According to the DHS bulletins, there is a “heightened risk” that domestic violent extremists could “attempt to initiate civil war.” That kind of chatter has become increasingly common in online spaces frequented by right-wing extremist groups. That said, the DHS noted that the prosecutions of those involved in the January 6, 2021, insurrection and hesitation about potential false flag operations designed to entrap them could serve as deterrents.

Law enforcement officials across the country are bracing for the possibility of escalation, particularly in Democratic population centers. For instance, Detroit’s election headquarters have reportedly been reinforced with bulletproof glass and will be protected by armed guards after Trump supporters tried to interrupt ballot counting by chanting “Stop the count” and banging on the windows in 2020. Philadelphia election staff will count ballots in a warehouse encircled by a fence with barbed wire, miles from the downtown area where protesters gathered in 2020.

Ultimately, however, these preparations might not be enough to quell domestic violent extremist activity when Republican leaders are encouraging skepticism about the integrity of the election and are reportedly making secret plans to assure a second Trump term.

“Being aware of the potential for violence and damage to the institutions we rely upon is important,” retired Gen. Joseph Votel, an executive board member of the Center for Ethics and the Rule of Law at the University of Pennsylvania, said in a statement. “But it is insufficient in the face of legislative acts that are open to broad interpretation, strong political rhetoric that dominates the public information space, and imperfect individuals acting in accordance with their oaths.”

Update, November 1, 10:55 am ET: This story was originally published on October 31 and has been updated with Trump’s comments about Cheney.
This week, Emily Bazelon, John Dickerson, and David Plotz discuss the final week of the presidential campaign; the threats to election integrity; and the consequences of not endorsing. Join us on December 4 for Political Gabfest Live in Brooklyn! Tickets are on sale now. And send us your Conundrums at slate.com/conundrum.

Here are some notes and references from this week’s show:

Consider This From NPR: Harris makes her final pitch for her presidency and Donald Trump’s closing argument: leaning into the extreme rhetoric

Kristen Holmes and Steve Contorno for CNN: Trump’s offensive Madison Square Garden rally triggers fears of an overshadowed message and fallout with Puerto Rican voters

Megan Messerly and Jessica Piper for Politico: Dems see signs for optimism in gender gap in early vote

Ed O’Keefe, Weijia Jiang, Olivia Rinaldi, Jacob Rosen, Fin Gómez, and Arden Farhl for CBS News: “Supporters” or “supporter’s”? Biden comments about Trump “garbage” rally anger the GOP

Will Weissert and Chris Megerian for AP: Harris promises to ‘represent all Americans’ after Biden’s remark on Trump supporters and ‘garbage’

Emily Brooks for The Hill: Johnson says ‘little secret’ with Trump is get-out-the-vote effort, not ‘diabolical’

NBC News: Liz Cheney: ‘I do not have faith’ Speaker Johnson will certify election

Taijuan Moorman for USA Today: Bad Bunny, JLo, Ricky Martin support Harris after Trump rally Puerto Rico comments

Natasha Korecki for NBC News: ‘We must mobilize’: Harris rallies with Beyonce and Willie Nelson in Texas

Kevin Dolak for The Hollywood Reporter: Kamala Harris Taps Eminem and Bruce Springsteen for Campaign Events as Election Day Approaches

Ian Millhiser for Vox: A new Supreme Court case could change the result of the presidential election

Mark Joseph Stern for Slate: The Supreme Court Just Carved an Outrageous Loophole Into a Major Voting Rights Law

Votebeat: Nonpartisan local reporting on elections and voting

CISA: A Message to Election Officials from CISA Director Jen Easterly

Elahe Izadi for The Washington Post: After non-endorsement, 250,000 subscribers cancel The Washington Post

Brian Beutler for Off Message: The Resistance Demands Respect, Too

Jeff Bezos for The Washington Post: Opinion: The hard truth: Americans don’t trust the news media

James Rainey for the Los Angeles Times: L.A. Times owner’s decision not to endorse in presidential race sparks resignations, questions

Here are this week’s chatters:

Emily: My Brilliant Friend on HBO and My Brilliant Friend by Elena Ferrante; Caroline Kitchener for The Washington Post: She said she had a miscarriage – then got arrested under an abortion law

John: Jennifer Hassan for The Washington Post: Who stole 24 tons of cheddar? ‘Sophisticated’ cheese heist sparks police hunt. and Neal’s Yard Dairy

David: Nobody Wants This. on Netflix and POTUS Among Us: Beyond Belief With Special Guest David Plotz

Listener chatter from Jacob in Chicago: Ariel Wittenberg for Politico: How ‘green’ inhalers could evade Biden’s drug pricing legacy

For this week’s Slate Plus bonus segment, Emily, John, and David talk about what to do while you’re waiting for election results.

In the latest Gabfest Reads, John talks with Dan Harris about his book, 10% Happier 10th Anniversary Edition: How I Tamed the Voice in My Head, Reduced Stress Without Losing My Edge, and Found Self-Help That Actually Works – A True Story.

Email your chatters, questions, and comments to gabfest@slate.com. (Messages may be referenced by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)

Podcast production by Cheyna Roth

Research by Julie Huygen

Want more Political Gabfest? Join Slate Plus to unlock weekly bonus episodes. Plus, you’ll access ad-free listening across all your favorite Slate podcasts. You can subscribe directly from the Political Gabfest show page on Apple Podcasts and Spotify. Or visit slate.com/gabfestplus to get access wherever you listen.
Moral fortitude has never been a prominent character trait of the obscenely wealthy. Even so, as the White House remains up for grabs, it has been discouraging to see multiple billionaires and CEOs hedging their bets to avoid being found on a future President Donald Trump’s bad side.

In one light, trying to stay in the good graces of a president is business as usual for the corporate elite. They like to spread out donations between parties, ensuring favor from whoever comes out on top. But banking on a second Trump administration to deliver similar results this time around could prove a bad bet by America’s 1%, one that could leave them bankrupt not just morally but financially, as well.

The obsequious fanboy behavior by Tesla and SpaceX owner Elon Musk is in a category of its own among the billionaire class. But others among his financial stratum have been speaking volumes through their silence. Midwest magnate Warren Buffet and JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, for example, are refusing to endorse either candidate publicly. Even if Trump weren’t a threat to American democracy, you’d think the threat he poses to the health of the U.S. economy would be enough for them to take sides.

The spinelessness on display is even more obvious when it comes to those billionaires who own major media outlets. Los Angeles Times publisher Patrick Soon-Shiong caused an uproar last week when he nixed his paper’s endorsement. It paled in comparison, though, to the outrage directed at Amazon owner Jeff Bezos, whose decision to spike The Washington Post’s endorsement of Harris has caused a mass exodus of the newspaper’s subscribers.

Their decisions are especially telling because of the business their companies has with the federal government.

Their decisions are especially telling because of the business their companies has with the federal government. Soon-Shiong has reason to stay on the good side of regulators with the Food and Drug Administration even if Trump mass fires civil servants to be replaced with cronies. Amazon’s cloud computing contracts with the Defense Department and the National Security Agency alone are worth around $20 billion. Trump also reportedly met with executives from Blue Origin, Bezos’ rocketry company and a rival to Musk’s SpaceX, the same day the Post announced it wouldn’t make a presidential endorsement.

Bezos wrote in an opinion piece published on Monday that he didn't know about the meeting before it took place. But regardless of the timing, the Blue Origin meeting is an example of big business titans — especially those in Silicon Valley — attempting to ingratiate themselves with Trump in case he wins. There was plenty of discussion about the danger another Trump presidency would present at a recent meeting of the Business Council, a high-level gathering of CEOs.

Two Trump campaign advisers, who went unnamed, recently told the Post that “numerous executives” had been reaching out. One of those advisers hinted at retribution for perceived disloyalty from business leaders, all but warning that their time is running short to appease Trump:

“I’ve told CEOs to engage as fast as possible because the clock is ticking. … If you’re somebody who has endorsed Harris, and we’ve never heard from you at any point until after the election, you’ve got an uphill battle,” the Trump adviser said. “People are back-channeling, looking at their networks — they’re talking to lobbyists to see what they can do to connect with the president and his team.”

Trump has been outlandishly transparent in his promises to various business sectors about how well he’ll treat them once in office. The “quo” in this quid pro quo would be donations to his campaign, in the form of either massive outpourings of cash (as in the case of the crypto cabal) or in-kind contributions such as mailers to voters declaring Trump’s newfound love of the vaping industry.

With Trump, there is no such thing as an ironclad deal that doesn’t benefit him personally.

In one sense, this could be seen as a return to form for America. For much of the 19th century this was how politics worked. The patronage system greased the wheels for robber barons to accumulate fortunes on the backs of poor laborers. A wave of anti-corruption laws were passed in the 20th century, but lax campaign finance regulations have made it easy for tycoons to place their chips on whoever might win regardless of party. And Trump speaks to their long-standing interests in deregulation and massive tax cuts for the wealthy and corporations. But these billionaires might be putting too much faith in the continuation of the rule of law.

With Trump, there is no such thing as an ironclad deal that doesn’t benefit him personally. His appetite for retribution is well-established, and any slight or perceived disloyalty is enough to curry his disfavor. Instead, the system that Trump would preside over would likely more closely resemble how Russian President Vladimir Putin has handled his country’s oligarchs.

After the fall of the Soviet Union, the onetime party apparatchiks who seized control of formerly state-run industries were at one point more powerful than the Kremlin. But over his time in power, Putin brought them to heel, targeting his detractors for arrest and show trials, stripping them of their assets and doling them out to loyalists or pocketing them himself. Billionaires who still exist within Russia do so only through Putin’s grace.

One of Trump’s former officials, Russia expert Fiona Hill, who served on the National Security Council, noted in a recent interview with Politico that Trump “has already made an example of Jeff Bezos, who was punished for his criticisms when Trump was in power previously by Trump trying to deny Amazon major government contracts. That’s exactly a hallmark of an oligarchy or of an autocracy.”

It seems doubtful at this late stage of the game that many of the titans of industry fearful of Trump will heed Hill’s warnings about how Trump’s vision of power can be turned against them. There’s no free market in a world of kings, as there can be no fair dealings in a world where one man’s word is law. There’s likewise no guarantee that Trump will lose, which may be forcing these billionaires to make their own self-preservation paramount. But their willingness to potentially sacrifice the rest of us, and the well-being of the country, in the process is the true mark of cowardice.
Mayor Eric Adams answers questions during his weekly in-person press conference at City Hall on Tuesday, Oct. 29, 2024. (Luiz C. Ribeiro/New York Daily News/Tribune News Service via Getty Images) New York Daily News via Getty Images

This story was originally published by THE CITY. Sign up to get the latest New York City news delivered to you each morning.

At his weekly briefing with reporters Tuesday, Mayor Eric Adams took digs at the media, his competitors for next year’s mayoral primary, and, not for the first time, City Comptroller Brad Lander.

Advertisement

But with just one week to go before the presidential election, Adams declined to say anything negative about former President Donald Trump — and refused to answer even factual questions, such as when the two last spoke.

“Give me another question, please,” he told his staffer after that inquiry, before adding to the reporter: “You lost your opportunity.”

The briefing came just days after a huge Trump rally at Madison Square Garden, at which a comedian guest speaker referred to Puerto Rico as an island of garbage and where Trump himself restated his vow to launch “the largest deportation program in American history” if elected.

Asked about comic Tony Hinchcliffe’s Puerto Rico remark Tuesday, Adams pointed to a statement his office released on X condemning the “hateful words,” but he added that one person’s words shouldn’t be considered a statement on the entire Trump rally.

Advertisement

Among those attending was NYPD Chief of Patrol John Chell, who appeared in uniform and participated in a segment with the Trump-partisan media channel NewsMax.

“You can’t demonize an entire population based on the actions of those who attend,” he said.

At one point in an unusually feisty press conference, Adams was asked about the city’s preparations in response to Trump’s promise to launch a mass deportation of “illegal aliens” on day one of his administration.

“This is a sanctuary city, something that I advocated for. Those who commit illegal actions in the city, I don’t believe they should be able to remain here after they serve their time,” Adams answered. “But other than that, I’m not entertaining any hypotheticals.”

Adams and his administration have been weathering tumult ever since he was indicted by Manhattan U.S. Attorney Damian Williams in late September on charges that include bribery, fraud and soliciting donations from foreign nationals.

The case is centered on perks Adams allegedly received from representatives of the Turkish government — including free airline upgrades and discounted luxury hotel stays — in exchange for taking official actions to benefit those reps, most notably by pressuring fire department officials in late 2021 to declare a Turkish building ready to open despite safety concerns.

Advertisement

Adams has pleaded not guilty to the charges.

Since the indictment, the mayor has seen his support dip to record lows while many members of his inner circle — including the former police commissioner, schools chancellor, deputy mayor for public safety and senior advisor for public safety — have resigned after federal authorities raided their homes or seized their phones.

During that time, Adams has been notably reluctant to criticize Trump, the Republican nominee for president, who, if he wins, would have the power to replace Williams.

City Comptroller Brad Lander, who is running in the Democratic primary against Adams next year, has speculated on X that Adams could be angling for a presidential pardon should he be convicted. As president, Trump repeatedly used his power to pardon people convicted of federal crimes to reward supporters with clemency.

Asked about that claim Tuesday, Adams answered: “Lander, ooh, he’s the moral authority of life, you know. Listen, next question.”

Lander didn’t respond to a text message seeking comment but posted on X that Adams didn’t deny the claim.

Advertisement

Public Advocate Jumaane Williams said Adams’ deference to Trump after publicly criticizing the administration of President Joe Biden for its handling of the migrant crisis was “shameful” for the mayor, who won public office as a Democrat but was previously registered to vote as a Republican.

“We have a so-called Democratic mayor basically playing footsie with Donald trump,” Jumaane Williams told THE CITY. “It’s disgraceful that Eric Adams can’t find one thing to denounce about Donald Trump but he spent years bashing Biden and Harris – even though he called himself the Biden of Brooklyn.”

Previously, Adams had been more willing to denounce Trump. Just days after President Biden won the election in November 2020, Adams referred at a press conference to the “bigotry and hatred of the previous president.”

Two years later, when he was asked about Trump’s potential run for president against Biden, Adams told WABC radio, “I don’t think he should. I believe that for whatever reason, rightfully or wrongfully, it really divided the country during his run as president.”

Adams’ tone on Democratic nominee Kamala Harris has also shifted in recent months. When she first became the nominee to replace Biden on the ticket in early August, Adams told reporters, “I am rocking with the VP and Tim [Walz], the announcement that she made today. I’m excited about that ticket.”

Advertisement

On Tuesday, Adams failed to make any direct reference to Harris — even when he was asked whom he planned to vote for next week.
Crowdsourced voting fraud claims could become grist for Republican lawsuits

toggle caption Kena Betancur/AFP via Getty Images

As Election Day nears, social media is lighting up with users scouring for evidence of election fraud. Some of those unsubstantiated claims are poised to become grist for Republican lawsuits contesting results should former President Donald Trump lose.

One hub of these efforts is an "Election Integrity Community" on X, formerly Twitter, set up by owner Elon Musk's super PAC, that is inviting users to "share potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities you see while voting in the 2024 election."

Sponsor Message

The feed is full of unverified claims and rumors. A video of a Republican poll watcher suggesting — incorrectly — that ineligible noncitizens can vote as long as they can present a driver's license got over a million views. Other users were suspicious when they were told by election workers to put their ballots into drop boxes, which have been a subject of baseless conspiracy theories since 2020. A surge of posts claimed that voting machines were flipping votes in Georgia and elsewhere, which both the Georgia secretary of state and the manufacturer have debunked.

"What we're seeing…is a kind of motivated misinterpretation where people [who are] skeptical already…of whether elections are trustworthy — they've been told by some of their favorite candidates in some cases, that we can't trust the results…if that candidate doesn't win," said Kate Starbird, professor at University of Washington and co-founder of its Center for an Informed Public, which is tracking election rumors.



Viral false claims could fuel lawsuits

While people also gathered alleged evidence of fraud during the 2020 election, those who may challenge the election results are more ready to leverage the material this time around, Starbird said.

"There are lawyers at the ready to go take these rumors, misperceptions, misinterpretations, convert those into affidavits on Election Day or the days following, and try to use that either to contest whether certain votes are counted in certain places… or to use that to try to pressure election officials and others not to certify results," Starbird said.

Sponsor Message

Researchers and election officials say that one of the most prominent narratives circulating this year is the unfounded claim that noncitizens are voting or that they are allowed to vote in federal elections, giving Democrats an unfair advantage in what is expected to be a very tight race.

That baseless narrative has emerged as the main focus of Republican efforts to lay the groundwork to challenge the election outcome if Trump loses, say election law experts. States have cited it as a justification to attempt to purge people from the rolls. Thousands of eligible voters were ensnared by such an effort in Alabama, according to court records. Eligible voters in Texas and Virginia have been removed too, although the total number affected isn't clear yet.

The votes of naturalized citizens aren't the only ones being challenged by baseless claims. The far-right outlet The Gateway Pundit alleged the methods that some members of the military and Americans living abroad used to vote are vulnerable to hacking, and accused Democrats of exploiting overseas ballots to invent votes.

Those rumors also arose in 2020 and were debunked. A video Gateway Pundit cited as evidence was actually part of an Iranian influence operation called out by the Justice Department in 2021.

But Trump has recently repeated the false claim on his Truth Social platform. Republicans have filed lawsuits challenging the legitimacy of some ballots cast by U.S. citizens living abroad, though those challenges have not been successful.



Misinterpreting real-life events, seeing routine work as fishy

Many other false narratives about voting are also being recycled from past years. Rumors alleging that voting machines made by Dominion Voting Systems were flipping votes spread on social media in recent days. That company was the target of conspiracy theories in 2020 that ultimately resulted in a $787 million defamation settlement by Fox News and multiple ongoing lawsuits.

Sponsor Message

The posts that accused the company claimed that the poster or a friend or relative were ultimately able to vote as they wanted when they noticed that the machine's printed out ballot didn't match their chosen candidate.

But even though voters were able to choose their preferred candidates, high-profile figures including Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, R-Ga., who has regularly echoed conspiratorial narratives, continued to amplify the accusation that Dominion machines might be changing votes.

In statements to NPR, Dominion Voting Systems said its machines were not changing any votes and pointed to a page on its website addressing common rumors about the company titled "Setting the Record Straight".

toggle caption Olivier Touron/AFP via Getty Images

Other easily dispelled falsehoods have quickly gone viral. Republican activist Cliff Maloney, who organizes door knockers aiming to get Pennsylvanian Republicans to vote early, said that one of his contacts identified 53 voters registered at a monastery in Erie County where, the contact claimed, no one lived. The monastery — which in fact houses over 50 nuns — quickly put out a response correcting the claim, and CNN spoke with the sisters who were the listed registered voters.

But Maloney's response to being fact checked was to double down on his claim. "WRONG," he wrote on X. The site's owner, Musk, amplified Maloney's initial claim, but there's no indication that he also shared the fact checks.

Ignoring checks and remedies in place is another common theme of those trying to cast doubt on election results, University of Washington researchers wrote in a September blog post.

High tension inspires high vigilance

With both parties telling their supporters to vote early, concerns about ballot drop boxes have also resurfaced. Drop boxes in three states have been set on fire. Starbird noted that rumors are starting to circulate around the incidents, but she said they, as well as isolated incidents of stolen ballots, miss a larger point.

"This is really problematic for the individuals, but it's unlikely to change the results of the election," she said, noting that one of the rhetorical strategies of election deniers is to exaggerate the impact of events.

Starbird worries what constant vigilance about voter fraud is doing in a country steeped for years in Trump's false assertions that the election was stolen from him in 2020 — a worldview that has been embraced by many Republicans and that has dented many Americans' confidence in voting.

Sponsor Message

"At its best, what this can do is quickly identify problems so that election officials can solve them. And that's what we want," she said. "At its worst, what happens is these things get wrapped into these sort of false narratives, reinforce [them] and people begin to lose trust in the process."

And that, Starbird said, "can distract election workers and election officials from real problems."
Former President Donald Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris differ on everything from tariffs to abortion. Yet both have made their support for crypto a part of their platforms.

Trump, who used to think cryptocurrency “seems like a scam,” now says that, if elected, he’ll turn the United States into the “crypto capital of the planet” and make it a “bitcoin superpower.” He promises to fire Gary Gensler, the current chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission, who has cracked down on the emergent industry and accused multiple crypto companies and executives of violating American law.

While it’s not quite right to say almost no one likes crypto, there is certainly no public groundswell for it.

Though Harris is less hyperbolic in her support, she’s also emphasized her backing for the industry. She says her administration, should it come to pass, will “encourage innovative technologies like AI and digital assets.” And she has told big money donors she will ensure a “safer business environment” for investors in the currency.

Why so much attention to this particular issue? The industry and its supporters like to point to “crypto voters.” But while it’s not quite right to say almost no one likes crypto, there is certainly no public groundswell for it. Less than 1 in 5 Americans has ever owned or traded cryptocurrency. When voters are asked their opinion about cryptocurrency, they are more likely than not to have a negative one, saying they don’t trust it. Even for young men, who are disproportionately likely to own cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency isn’t among their top 20 issues.

The answer, then, must lie elsewhere. It is almost certainly not a coincidence that the cryptocurrency industry has come seemingly out of nowhere to emerge as the largest corporate donor in federal elections in the 2024 election cycle. How else to explain that the industry’s Orwellian-named super PAC Fairshake is pouring millions into backing favored candidates of both parties and attacking those it wants to lose? Earlier this year, the industry successfully targeted Democratic Reps. Jamaal Bowman and Katie Porter in their House and Senate primaries, respectively.

More recently, the industry has poured money into Ohio’s Senate race, bashing Democratic incumbent Sherrod Brown. In Southern California, millions in crypto money are backing Republican Reps. Michelle Steel, Mike Garcia and Young Kim — highly competitive races that could be key to Democrats regaining control of the House.

Tellingly, the ads backed by the industry are almost never about, you know, crypto. Those targeting Bowman and Porter accused the former of not being tough on crime and the latter of hypocrisy on (ironically) campaign finance. The anti-Brown ads hammer him on immigration, while touting his opponent, crypto-friendly Republican Bernie Moreno as a family-friendly ally of Big Oil.

As of June 30, crypto corporations had spent $119 million, mainly through Fairshake. That’s nearly half of all corporate spending on the 2024 campaigns to date, and well ahead of other industries like Big Oil. What’s motivated the industry to ramp up its spending? In a word, legislation.

No one has articulated a use case for cryptocurrency that makes any sense for the typical law-abiding investor or voter.

“The U.S. has proven to be one of the most active enforcers of penalties and legal action against crypto companies,” CNBC reported at the end of 2023. Leading the way have been the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Some of the industry’s biggest names have been caught: In March, FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried was sentenced to 25 years in prison for fraud. Last year, Changpeng Zhao and his crypto exchange Binance pled guilty to violating money laundering and sanctions laws and agreed to pay over $4 billion in fines. Under Gensler, the SEC has brought more than 100 enforcement actions against the sector.

Crypto advocates, unsurprisingly, aren’t happy with this. They favor a bill that would see the digital currency largely regulated by the small and financial industry-friendly Commodity Futures Trading Commission, significantly downsizing the SEC’s authority in the area. Industry bigwigs and billionaire investors alike are also chomping at the bit to see Gensler axed. Last month, entrepreneur Mark Cuban, a prominent Harris supporter, even suggested himself as a replacement. Ripple Labs CEO Brad Garlinghouse recently told Bloomberg TV, “Gary Gensler’s reign of terror on the crypto industry is going to come to an end very soon.” (Ripple, it won’t surprise you to know, is in an ongoing multiyear battle with the SEC over, yes, whether it should have registered its XRP token as a security.)

The crypto industry promotes its products as a way for the financially underserved to get a piece of the action. But the true believers parroting this ridiculous line don’t bother to explain why they shouldn’t just invest in the stock market instead. Similarly, to this day, no one has articulated a use case for cryptocurrency that makes any sense for the typical law-abiding investor or voter. It’s not an inflation hedge. Its value varies way too much to be useful as a currency substitute. Fraud is rampant in the space. For all the grand pronouncements that crypto would revolutionize finance, the only thing it has so far enabled is greater ease in cash laundering and other illegal behavior. It’s used by a rogue’s gallery of international villains, including Chinese fentanyl producers and North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.

Yet in the big bucks sweepstake that is the American system of legalized corruption, politely called campaign financing, none of this seems to matter. Instead, the crypto industry’s generous donations again demonstrate that Americans have the best politics money can buy.
Arnold Schwarzenegger has endorsed Kamala Harris for president

toggle caption Markus Schreiber/AP

Former Republican governor and actor Arnold Schwarzenegger has endorsed Democratic nominee Kamala Harris for president.

In a lengthy Wednesday post on X, Schwarzenegger said he does not typically give endorsements, as he doesn’t “trust most politicians,” but he understands his own influence.

He described former President Trump as “a candidate who won’t respect your vote unless it is for him, a candidate who will send his followers to storm the Capitol while he watches with a Diet Coke, a candidate who has shown no ability to work to pass any policy besides a tax cut that helped his donors and other rich people like me but helped no one else else [sic], a candidate who thinks Americans who disagree with him are the bigger enemies than China, Russia, or North Korea."

Sponsor Message

Schwarzenegger said he is frustrated with both parties' inaction, especially on issues such as immigration reform and national debt.

"It is a just game to them," he said.

He additionally highlighted some of his accomplishments during his time as California’s governor from 2003 to 2011, including reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving the state’s infrastructure and lowering the unemployment rate.

“That’s policy,” he said. “It requires working with the other side, not insulting them to win your next election, and I know it isn’t sexy to most people, but I love it when I can help make people’s lives better with policies.”

He concluded by saying, “That’s enough reason for me to share my vote with all of you. I want to move forward as a country, and even though I have plenty of disagreements with their platform, I think the only way to do that is with Harris and [her running mate] Walz.”
As the 2024 presidential election entered its final stretch, Donald Trump has struggled to respond to Kamala Harris’ policy agenda, to the point that the former Republican president started making up ideas that the Democratic vice president never endorsed. In recent weeks, for example, the GOP candidate has said his opponent intends to ban cows and buildings with windows, which was obviously absurd.

But at his latest rally in North Carolina, Trump didn’t just target Harris’ proposals, he also attacked the nature of her ideas.

“Her plans,” the Republican said, “are the plans of a simpleton.”

To be sure, we’ve all heard the “every accusation is a confession” line when it comes to Trump, but the “her plans are the plans of a simpleton” argument is a rather extreme example of the phenomenon.

Exactly one month before the former president made the comment, Trump shared his idea on how to address street crime: If there were “one real rough, nasty” and “violent day” of police retaliation, he said, it would eradicate crime “immediately.”

It followed Trump suggesting that the country could combat shoplifting by having the police shoot shoplifters.

These were not isolated incidents. As I argued in my first book, Trump genuinely seems to believe that every challenge can and should be addressed through unexamined, overly simplified answers.

The immigration system is broken? Build an ineffective wall. Hurricanes are approaching American soil? Hit them with nuclear weapons. There are too many shooters killing children in schools? Put more guns in the hands of school officials who might shoot back. A virus is killing hundreds of thousands of Americans? Try injecting people with disinfectants.

Drugs are ravaging communities? If we simply executed drug dealers, the problem would go away. Russia is waging a brutal and unnecessary war in Ukraine? Slap some Chinese flags on U.S. fighter jets and point them in Moscow’s direction. There are social justice protesters outside the White House? Shoot them in the legs. There are drug cartels in Mexico? Launch missiles into our allied neighbor. There was a terrorist attack on U.S. soil? Impose “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country’s representatives can figure out what the hell is going on.”

In Trump’s mind, there’s no such thing as a complex challenge requiring a complex solution. Everything is easy. Every question has a simple answer, and every problem can be solved with a simple fix.

It’s post-policy politics at its most obvious: Trump doesn’t want to be bothered with analyses and relevant details, which only leave him confused. He wants to bark out bumper-sticker-style “proposals” that generate applause at rallies.

And yet, there was the Republican nominee, declaring that Harris’ plans “are the plans of a simpleton.”

It’s as if someone explained projection to Trump, and he thought it sounded fun.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Donald Trump is angry that Kamala Harris wants voters to take his threats against the Affordable Care Act seriously.

On Thursday, the vice president and 2024 Democratic presidential nominee suggested during a press conference in Wisconsin that Trump would try to repeal the 2010 health care law, on which tens of millions now rely for insurance. Her Republican rival responded with a post on his Truth Social platform.

Advertisement

“Lyin’ Kamala is giving a News Conference now, saying that I want to end the Affordable Care Act,” Trump wrote. “I never mentioned doing that, never even thought about such a thing.”

But less than two months ago, during a presidential debate with Harris, Trump answered a question about the law, also known as Obamacare, by saying it was “lousy health care. ... If we come up with something, and we are working on things, we’re going to do it and we’re going to replace it.”

“I have concepts of a plan,” he added during a follow-up exchange. “I’m not president right now. But if we come up with something, I would only change it if we come up with something that’s better and less expensive. And there are concepts and options we have to do that. And you’ll be hearing about it in the not-too-distant future.”

One reason Trump got the debate question was a series of previous posts on Truth Social musing about the law’s fate, going back to one last fall in which he wrote that “The cost of Obamacare is out of control, plus, it’s not good Healthcare. I’m seriously looking at alternatives.”

Advertisement

In that same post, he said Republicans “should never give up” on trying to repeal and replace it.

A few days later, Trump posted that “I don’t want to terminate Obamacare, I want to REPLACE IT with MUCH BETTER HEALTHCARE. Obamacare Sucks!!!” He also said that, if elected, he would seek to produce “much better Healthcare than Obamacare for the American people.”

More recently, Trump’s 2024 running mate, Sen. JD Vance (R-Ohio), has talked about Republicans pursuing a “deregulatory” agenda on health care.

And just this week, as first reported by NBC News, House Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) told an audience that “health care reform’s going to be a big part of the agenda” if Republicans are in power next year.

Johnson went on to answer a question about the Affordable Care Act by saying, “No Obamacare,” although the meaning of that particular statement was difficult to pin down given the context.

The recent rhetoric has distinct echoes of what Trump said as a 2016 presidential candidate and then after his election, when he would make promises like “everybody’s going to be taken care of much better than they’re taken care of now.”

Advertisement

Trump never produced a plan in line with this vow. Instead, the Republican proposals he backed and tried to get through Congress would have weakened or eliminated the Affordable Care Act’s rules for insurance coverage while dramatically reducing spending on government-provided or government-financed coverage.

As a result, the number of Americans without insurance would likely have spiked.

That prospect proved to be highly unpopular. It was a big reason why Trump couldn’t convince enough GOP lawmakers to support repeal, and why Republicans took heavy losses in the 2018 midterm elections.

The memory of those losses still lingers in the minds of many Republican leaders, enough that they might think twice before trying a full repeal again, even if they emerge from this year’s elections with control of both the White House and Congress.

But GOP leaders have long said that the Affordable Care Act is bad policy on the merits, arguing that its mix of regulation, spending and taxes distorts insurance markets and hurts the economy.

Republicans also need spending reductions to offset the proposed tax cuts they are intent on passing. An obvious source would be the money going into the Affordable Care Act, especially the portion going to expansions of Medicaid, the government-financed program for low-income Americans.

Advertisement

And Republicans could always pursue a more piecemeal approach to weakening the law, whether by rewriting key regulations or changing component parts through legislation.
TRENTON, Mich. ― Control of the White House and Senate could come down to a relatively small number of undecided voters here in Michigan. Among them are voters who still consider themselves Republican, or lean that way.

During a visit to a campaign office south of Detroit last week, Democratic Senate nominee Elissa Slotkin told canvassers she understood how difficult getting to these voters will be.

Advertisement

“They’re sick of the TV ads, they’re sick of the mailers,” Slotkin said. “And here you come to knock on their door.”

But Slotkin has heard from local Republican officials who say they are tired of Trump’s “chaos,” and from Republican women angry over their party’s attack on reproductive rights. “The window is open,” Slotkin said. “These people are deciding, what am I going to do?”

Democrats are banking on those voters being as receptive as Slotkin says, and on Slotkin being the candidate who can secure their support. At 48, the congresswoman is a rising star in her party and has won three U.S. House elections in tough, Republican-leaning districts. She was such an obvious choice to succeed retiring incumbent Sen. Debbie Stabenow that no high-profile Democrats challenged her nomination.

Slotkin’s formula starts with her well-cultivated, and in some ways well-deserved, image as a more conservative Democrat. She lives in a rural part of the state, on a family farm where she spent part of her childhood. She has a background in national security and worked for presidents in both parties. She isn’t shy about criticizing fellow Democrats, and she’s publicly disavowed progressive slogans like “defund the police” and “abolish ICE.”

Advertisement

But Slotkin has been with her party’s leaders on issues like abortion, health care and taxes ― not just as an ally, but as a vocal champion. She promotes Democrats as the party most committed to protecting American companies and American workers in the face of foreign competition. And she has been a relentless critic of Donald Trump, especially when it comes to issues tied to the future of democracy.

This posture should look familiar, because it’s a lot like the one Kamala Harris has taken into the presidential campaign. That’s not a coincidence: The sitting vice president’s surest path to the presidency lies in winning Michigan plus two other Great Lakes states, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, who together form the electoral “Blue Wall.”

These states have similar political profiles and are full of recently elected Democratic officials who, like Slotkin, have won elections by pursuing a pragmatic, problem-solving agenda while fighting fiercely to stop Trump. That new direction is very much a reaction to his rise, and the void in the common-sense center of American politics Trumpism has left.

But few distill this approach to its essence like Slotkin does. And now that approach is facing what may be its toughest test. Polling averages have Slotkin ahead of her Republican opponent, former Rep. Mike Rogers, but the margin has shrunk to less than three points.

Slotkin’s success hints at a durable strategy for stopping Trumpism, but only if that strategy works in 2024. And at this point, it’s as easy to construct reasons for why it won’t succeed as it is to feel confident that it will.

Advertisement

Slotkin’s path into public service, as she related it to HuffPost in a recent interview, goes back to her first days in a graduate program at Columbia University in Manhattan, when a fellow student stopped her in the hall to say a small plane had crashed into the World Trade Center. Slotkin, who had just returned from studying Arabic and politics in Egypt, immediately suspected terrorism. “There’s no accidentally hitting the World Trade Center,” Slotkin remembered thinking.

Slotkin and her classmates donated blood and volunteered at a nearby hospital expecting wounded victims of the attack — what turned out to be a futile gesture, because there were so few survivors to treat. But Slotkin says that day changed her career trajectory, prompting her to shift from studying global development to studying national security.

A year later, a professor invited her to lunch with a Central Intelligence Agency recruiter, and a year after that she was accepted into the agency. She would go on to three overseas tours in Iraq, then would leave the CIA to work in the State and Defense departments, eventually serving in both the Bush and Obama administrations.

Many Michiganders now know about Slotkin’s bipartisan background, thanks to a biographical campaign ad that was all over the airwaves this spring and summer. They also know her entry into electoral politics traces back to 2017, when she returned to her family’s farm in rural Michigan and watched as Republicans tried to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Slotkin remembered how insurers had once denied her mother coverage because of an earlier battle with cancer, which they considered a pre-existing condition. The Affordable Care Act, which came to be known as Obamacare, had put an end to that practice, though not before her mother’s cancer returned ― and, in 2011, took her life.

Advertisement

Slotkin says she was furious Trump was trying to take away those insurance protections, and even more furious when she spotted her Republican congressman, Mike Bishop, standing at a Rose Garden ceremony Trump held to celebrate passage of repeal legislation through the House.

Slotkin canvasses door to door with campaign volunteers Karen More, center, and Laura Murphy, right, near Holly, Michigan on Friday August 31, 2018. This was her first campaign for the U.S. House, and she would go on to win the seat. The Washington Post via Getty Images

When talking about these memories, Slotkin likes to say, “Something in me broke.” She might just as well be speaking about the mood of the country, which turned sharply against Trump during the first year of his presidency. His attempts to repeal Obamacare, his attacks on immigrants, his assault on reproductive health care access ― all of it fueled a political backlash, especially among younger women, some of whom were so angry they decided to run for state or federal office in the next election.

With a few exceptions, these women weren’t looking to push politics to the left so much as they were looking to pull it back from the right. And in Michigan especially, they ran the table in the 2018 midterms, producing a new class of Democratic leaders, including Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson and Rep. Haley Stevens.

Slotkin’s challenge against Bishop was arguably the toughest, given that in 2016 Bishop had won the relatively conservative, heavily rural district by 16 points. But Slotkin proved a skilled messenger and prodigious fundraiser ― talents that came together in a brutal ad, widely aired, that juxtaposed clips of Bishop at the Obamacare repeal rally with home movies of Slotkin’s late mother.

Advertisement

On Election Day, Slotkin beat Bishop by three points.

In office, Slotkin has made plenty of headlines by openly breaking with prominent Democrats. In 2021, she refused to vote for Nancy Pelosi as speaker, saying it was time for a new generation of leadership. Last year, after the Oct. 7 attack on a music festival that killed more then 1,200 Israelis, she criticized fellow Michigan House Democrat Rashida Tlaib for not explicitly condemning Hamas, the group behind the killings, as a terrorist group.

But Slotkin later voted against a broader, GOP-backed censure motion in the House. And among the causes that Slotkin has championed is one many progressives also hold dear: She wants the federal government to negotiate drug prices directly with drugmakers, as other countries do, to make medications more affordable.

She has campaigned on that idea and introduced bills to put it in practice. In 2022, she supported drug negotiation provisions that went into the Inflation Reduction Act, which passed and became law — and which are on their way to making it easier for seniors to pay for some of their prescriptions.

Supporting drug price negotiation is not that politically difficult, to be clear. The idea is enormously popular, even with Republican voters. But that’s a key ingredient in the success of Slotkin and other Democrats like her. Republicans have staked out so many extreme or unpopular positions, like opposition to a policy widely thought to make drugs cheaper, that she can speak up for mainstream Democratic positions without alienating moderate and even some conservative voters.

Nowhere is this dynamic more obvious than on the issue of Trump’s conduct, from the crass to the criminal — a subject that Slotkin brings up all the time, and one that led to what may have been the most iconic moment of her career in the House.

Advertisement

It was in December 2019, when the House was considering whether to impeach then-President Trump over his relationship and interactions with Vladimir Putin. Slotkin announced she would vote yes at a town hall meeting that drew plenty of Trump supporters, including a handful who heckled her from the back throughout.

Slotkin told them she wanted to hear everyone’s views, but only in the context of a civil conversation with her constituents. She then proceeded to make her case for impeachment methodically, leaning heavily on her credentials as a former intelligence officer who knows a threat to national security when she sees one. Slotkin drew frequent, loud applause from the rest of the audience.

“I believe in the voters,” she told HuffPost after that event. “I believe in their decency.”

A year later, she won reelection – increasing her margin from the first race and outperforming Joe Biden, who narrowly lost the district to Trump.

Then-Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) speaks in Lansing, Michigan, on November 1, 2022. It was the first time she endorsed Slotkin, who at the time was running to stay in the U.S. House. Recently Cheney endorsed Slotkin for her Senate bid. JEFF KOWALSKY via Getty Images

In 2022, when Slotkin faced another tough race, she got the endorsement of Republican Liz Cheney, who at the time was still in Congress and finishing her tenure as co-chair of the congressional committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021 Capitol insurrection. Cheney announced she was backing Slotkin in a joint appearance that attracted hundreds.

Advertisement

On Monday, Cheney came back to Michigan to show support for Slotkin’s Senate bid. Less than two weeks earlier, Cheney had been in the state to campaign for another Democrat: Harris.

On paper, Mike Rogers would seem like the kind of Republican who would have crossover appeal of his own.

He is an Army veteran and former FBI agent who served seven terms in the House, the last three as chairman of the intelligence committee, before retiring from Congress in 2015. As representative for Michigan’s 8th, the same district that Bishop would inherit and Slotkin would then win, Rogers “branded himself a center-right institutionalist who put country over party, results over ideology,” Michigan-based political journalist Tim Alberta observed in Politico.

After leaving office, Rogers was openly critical of Trump while he worked as a CNN commentator and (briefly) contemplated a primary challenge to Trump in 2024.

“People are tired of the chaos,” Rogers told CBS News in 2023. “I think they’re ready for a calm, steady helm, where we actually make progress on issues that we have admired for 10 or 15 or 20 years and never quite can get to a conclusion.”

Advertisement

But Rogers opted instead to run for Senate. And to get Trump’s all-important backing, Rogers has made the ritual capitulations, like downplaying the former president’s role in Jan. 6 — which, the day afterwards, Rogers had said Trump provoked.

“You’re damn right you had responsibility for this,” Rogers said at the time.

Nowadays Rogers has a different view: “Well, I didn’t say he was clearly responsible,” he told CNN last week.

Rogers’ low-key style seems out of place in MAGA-land, and it’s hard to tell if his heart is really in it. Jeff Timmer, a former state Republican Party executive director, told HuffPost he thinks signs of Rogers ambivalence just makes him seem less trustworthy.

“He kind of makes these pained faces when he does it,” said Timmer, who now works with The Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump activist group . “But it’s just as detrimental to his chances.”

Rogers’ tenure in Congress means he has additional political baggage, including a record of support for national abortion bans. Rogers has tried to defuse the issue by saying he’d respect the will of Michigan’s voters, who in 2022 approved a constitutional amendment enshrining abortion rights.

Advertisement

Slotkin, a longtime defender of abortion rights, has warned voters that Rogers’ record is the true guide to his intentions.

“I am so sick of people who don’t understand women’s health, who don’t understand reproductive rights ... saying one thing and doing another,” Slotkin said during a televised debate with Rogers. “Michiganders, do not believe him. He will not protect you.”

U.S. Rep. Elissa Slotkin, D-Holly, the Democratic candidate for the open Michigan U.S. Senate seat, left, and former U.S. Rep. Mike Rogers the Republican candidate vying for the seat, debate the issues Monday, Oct. 14, 2024, with moderators Alicia Smith, Chuck Stokes and Carolyn Clifford of WXYZ-TV in Southfield, Mich. via Associated Press

Slotkin has also focused on Rogers’ opposition to giving the federal government the power to negotiate pharmaceutical prices — not just to highlight his record on a key pocketbook issue, but to make a broader point about his priorities.

She regularly invokes the fact that after leaving the House in 2015, Rogers accepted lucrative positions on corporate boards and moved to Florida, where he lived until he returned to Michigan for the Senate race.

Advertisement

But the race is still close. Rogers has hammered Slotkin over immigration, arguing that voters can trust him on border control because of his background in law enforcement. And he has blamed high consumer prices on inflation unleashed by Slotkin-approved federal spending.

These are the same arguments Republicans elsewhere are making. A tell-tale sign they are working in Michigan is that Slotkin always acknowledges them — “the No. 1 issue I hear about is inflation,” she said during another televised debate — before defending her record and ideas.

Rogers has also put questions about transgender people front and center in his campaign. On the day before the Republican primary in August, Rogers appeared alongside Trump’s former education secretary, Betsy DeVos, and Riley Gaines, the swimmer and anti-transgender activist. At the event, he signed a pledge to support bills that would exclude trans people from “female opportunities and private spaces.”

This too echoes Republican attacks on trans people and their inclusion in public life, both in the presidential race and down-ballot races across the country. And while Democratic campaign officials say their polling suggests only the most conservative voters are motivated by trans-related issues, the GOP’s goal in focusing on trans people may be something harder to measure: painting the Democrats as out of touch with mainstream America.

Former US President and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump shakes hands with US Senate candidate Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, as Rogers takes the stage to speak during a campaign rally at the Suburban Collection Showplace in Novi, Michigan, October 26, 2024. (Photo by Drew ANGERER / AFP) (Photo by DREW ANGERER/AFP via Getty Images) DREW ANGERER via Getty Images

Advertisement

During the HuffPost interview, Slotkin acknowledged that the Republican arguments about transgender athletes in particular resonate with plenty of Americans who don’t identify as conservative — including, she said, constituents who have pulled her aside to say, “I’m a lifelong Democrat, but I’m just not down with these issues.”

But Slotkin, who said she played three sports in high school, is quick to condemn the GOP’s anti-trans crusade.

She agrees transgender and cisgender athletes’ biological differences could affect competition. But, she said, it depends on the sport (“badminton is different than football”) and she thinks decisions about guidelines are best left to leagues and sponsoring organizations themselves, as they were before conservative agitators seized on the issue.

Republicans are just “playing on people’s fears,” Slotkin said. “It’s purposely trying to make you afraid, when in reality, this is something that individual schools and individual sports are managing.”

Slotkin added that the Republican attacks on transgender athletes feel to her a lot like “bullying children.” It’s something that hits home, she says, because her mother was gay and her brother was bullied in school when word got out.

Advertisement

Slotkin can’t take Democratic base voters’ support for granted, That’s especially true when it comes to U.S. policy towards Israel amid its war in Gaza, an issue already alienating members of Michigan’s large Arab American community and progressive students on the state’s big college campuses.

Slotkin calls the humanitarian situation in Gaza “abysmal” and said it was “sick” to suggest, as Israel’s far-right finance minister did this summer, that it would be OK to withhold food aid as leverage for the return of Israeli hostages. Slotkin has also warned about Israel repeating the mistakes she saw the U.S. make while serving in Iraq, when the military’s post-9/11 victories created more enemies.

“The way you prosecute the war often has a bigger impact on your long-term security than any one strike,” Slotkin told HuffPost, reiterating her public calls for a negotiated ceasefire.

But Slotkin is also unequivocal that Israel had a right to respond against Hamas militarily, telling HuffPost, “The idea that a country wouldn’t go after terrorists and killers who massacred and raped people is insane.” She went on to say that some civilian casualties were inevitable, and that “it really pisses me off that the media and lots of other folks don’t give any responsibility for [the war and its effects] to Hamas, Hezbollah or Iran.”

On Capitol Hill, Slotkin has voted to support continuing aid to Israel, though she has said she would consider making future aid conditional on Israel increasing humanitarian relief for Gazans.

Advertisement

Slotkin’s posture towards Israel is the reason the Arab American Political Action Committee announced earlier this month it was forgoing an endorsement in the Senate race, just as it was in the presidential. “We ask our community to not vote for either Democrat Elissa Slotkin or Republican Mike Rogers,” the group said. “Frankly, they are both warmongers and do not deserve your vote.”

Slotkin has also popped up in digital ads that portray Slotkin, who is Jewish, as an unflinching ally of Israel. The ads look like they are promoting Slotkin. In reality, the ads come from a Republican-aligned political organization and are running in areas with large numbers of Arab American and progressive voters — in other words, the would-be Democratic voters most likely to turn on Slotkin because of Israel.

The prospect of losing even some of these voters is meaningful in such a closely divided state. But Gaza was also an issue in the 2024 Democratic Senate primary — or, at least, it could have been.

Her one serious opponent, actor Harper Hill, was more critical of Israel than she has been. And as a youngish Black actor and Detroit native with a history of activism, he had potential to run up big numbers with progressives and Black voters. At one point, Politico reported, a wealthy donor offered Hill $20 million to drop his Senate bid.

But the race never became competitive. Slotkin had an enormous fundraising advantage and used it to blanket the state with ads. She also secured early endorsements from Black leaders in Michigan’s big cities, undercutting Hill’s appeal there. Slotkin ended up winning with 75% of the vote.

Advertisement

It’s possible the Senate race could come down to another issue of particular importance to Michiganders: electric vehicles and the future of the auto industry.

Rogers has hammered what he calls the Democratic “EV mandate” ― the combination of tighter emission standards and subsidies to support the production and purchase of EVs that became law under Biden. As Rogers tells it, these efforts will force Michigan-based automakers to make unprofitable vehicles that too few people will want, while subsidizing Chinese companies who already produce compliant vehicles and their parts.

“I think this may be the worst-designed, worst-implemented idea that I’ve ever seen,” Rogers said at a recent lunch event in one of the northern Detroit suburbs.

This has also been Trump’s argument, going back to when he was running against Biden. It’s not hard to see why it might resonate, given memories of American carmakers moving operations to other countries following free trade agreements that so many corporate and political leaders — including some former Democratic presidents — said at the time were good for American workers.

Biden’s primary response was to talk about all the new EV factories automakers and suppliers are building, to meet the demand they expect all of that federal support will generate. Slotkin made that argument too — though sometime around the late spring and summer, she took it further.

Advertisement

Slotkin speaks at a campaign event at a United Auto Workers Local 652 event at the Capital Region International Airport in Lansing, Michigan, October 18, 2024. JEFF KOWALSKY via Getty Images

She started stating more forcefully that she doesn’t want to “mandate” anything, and doesn’t care what anybody drives. But, she said, subsidizing EV production is necessary to make sure American companies can catch up and compete with Chinese competitors, because demand for the vehicles is going to rise no matter what U.S. carmakers do.

“Whether Michiganders want to drive an EV or not is not the question,” Slotkin told HuffPost. “It’s who do we want making the next generation of cars? And I’m on Team USA, not Team China, on that one.”

That appeal to patriotism is not accidental or limited to the way Slotkin talks about the auto industry.

The meeting last week, where Slotkin assured those canvassers Republican-leaning voters were open to voting for a Democrat, took place in Trenton, a small, politically divided city that Trump won by four points in 2020. Many lawns have Trump signs and American flags side by side.

Advertisement

“Wear your patriotism on your sleeve,” Slotkin told the organizers. “Proudly wear that flag, show that flag. The other side, many of them wrap themselves in the flag and then spit on the very thing it represents. They have no ownership, no special possession of the flag. All of you are here because you love your country.”

Lately Harris has been talking the same way in her campaign, wrapping both her promotion of American industry and defense of American democracy in the language of patriotism. It’s all part of the same effort to flip the script on Republicans, so that even more conservative voters come to see Trump and his party as the ones contemptuous of mainstream values.
There was an avalanche of depraved rhetoric at Donald Trump’s rally at Madison Square Garden on Sunday, though one quote stood out: A comedian supporting the former president described Puerto Rico as “a floating island of garbage,” which did not go over well — especially among Puerto Rican voters.

A couple of days later, President Joe Biden commented on the controversy, telling a group of Latino voters, “The only garbage I see floating out there is his supporter’s — his — his — his demonization of Latinos is unconscionable, and it’s un-American.”

An exasperating fight over an apostrophe soon followed, as Trump, his allies, his party, and conservative media feigned outrage and seized on the comments as a sequel to Hillary Clinton’s “deplorables” line from eight years ago.

Vice President Kamala Harris — who, unlike the incumbent president, is actually on the ballot this year — quickly distanced herself from the quote Republicans pretended to be offended by, telling reporters, “I strongly disagree with any criticism of people based on who they voted for.”

Trump nevertheless tried to milk the faux controversy, appearing in a Trump-branded garbage truck, holding a rally while wearing a garbage collector’s vest, and promoting images of himself wearing the outfit.

Subtle, it was not.

The theatrics were exasperating and desperate, but after the former president’s garbage-focused campaign rally, he managed to publish something interesting to his social media platform. It was a straightforward, 20-word message, published in all caps, which I’ve transposed to make it easier to read: “You can’t lead America if you don’t love Americans — and you can’t be president if you hate the American people!”

Oddly enough, the assertion was rather compelling. It was also self-defeating.

In fact, if the 2024 race comes down to which candidate has done more to condemn Americans, the GOP ticket should probably expect to lose 50 states.

One of the things that makes Trump unique as a political figure is his willingness to condemn his own country. Voters have seen and heard him slam the United States as a “failing nation,” a “nation in decline,” “evil,” and more recently, a “garbage can.” Reminded during a recent interview that America is a great country, Trump said he disagreed.

But the Republican candidate has been equally eager to disparage Americans he disagrees with. They’re “the enemy within.” They’re “evil.” They’re “horrible people.” They’re “scum.”

In 2018, referring to roughly half of his country’s electorate, he declared, “I got to tell you, anybody that votes for a Democrat now is crazy.”

On Veterans Day 2023, Trump went so far as to publish an online message vowing to “root out the Communists, Marxists, Fascists, and Radical Left Thugs that live like vermin within the confines of our Country.” A few months later, the GOP candidate likened Americans who oppose him to the foreign enemies that the United States fought in World War II.

“You can’t lead America if you don’t love Americans”? Does this mean that Trump is ending his candidacy?
Housing is expensive. Here’s how Harris and Trump promise to bring costs down

toggle caption Angela Weiss/AFP via Getty Images; Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images

Vice President Kamala Harris and former president Donald Trump don’t agree on much, but they do on one thing: The cost of housing is too high.

Housing costs have become a major source of worry and financial stress for many Americans as prices have outpaced paychecks and the share of renters burdened by housing costs has grown. Home prices have risen about 50% in the last five years, and many households are struggling to find a home they can afford to buy.

Here’s how the Harris and Trump campaigns say they will address the country’s housing woes.

Kamala Harris’s housing plan

When Harris talks about housing, she makes it personal, remembering how her mother saved up to buy a home and recalling her mother’s pride when she bought it. Then she hits the highlights of how she plans to make housing more affordable.

Sponsor Message

“As president, I will fight to help first-time homebuyers with your down payment, take on the companies that are jacking up rents, and build millions of new homes,” Harris said in a speech this week at the Ellipse, near the White House.

For Harris, the plan is a mix of increasing supply, providing financial support to aspiring homebuyers and curtailing corporate landlords.

Building a lot more homes

Harris wants to build three million new housing units. America is millions of housing units short, and increasing supply would help bring down rents and mortgages. Many housing experts agree that this focus on supply is a good approach.

To amp up that construction, especially at the cheaper end, Harris wants to expand the existing tax credits that are used to build affordable rental housing. She also wants to create a new tax credit that would incentivize building more starter homes.

toggle caption Peter Morgan/AP

Harris also proposes a $40 billion fund to spur new methods in housing construction, including more affordable home designs and new ways to finance construction.

The vice president also vows to cut the red tape that slows housing construction and makes it more expensive to build.

But much of the regulation and bureaucracy that limits housing is at the state and local level. The federal government has a limited ability to shape those rules, though it can certainly incentivize what it wants to see happen.



Sponsor Message

Assistance for first-time buyers

Harris is calling for $25,000 in down payment assistance for first-time homebuyers. With prices so high, down payment assistance for first-time buyers “can really help people make that leap,” says Shamus Roller, executive director of the National Housing Law Project.

But many economists argue that this support would actually drive prices higher.

Giving a bunch of people an extra $25,000 will increase demand, says Michael Strain, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute, a center-right think tank. And there’s already a lot of demand. More buyers bidding on homes would lead to higher prices, Strain says.

And though first-time buyers are the target of the assistance, “a lot of that $25,000 is going to go to the sellers of homes, and not to the buyers of homes,” Strain says.

The 2024 GOP platform also calls for tax incentives and support for first-time buyers. It’s not clear what the eligibility requirements would be in either party's proposal.

Targeting corporate landlords

Harris is calling on Congress to pass two bills she says would lower rents. One would remove tax breaks from large investors that buy up single-family homes, and another would prohibit landlords from using algorithmic software to increase rents.

Donald Trump’s housing plan

Trump’s plans when it comes to housing are much less detailed than Harris’s, but the former president frequently brings up housing costs in his speeches.

Like Harris, Trump talks about building more homes. He has called for opening more federal lands for housing, an idea that Harris also supports. He also pledges to slash regulations and make it easier to build.

toggle caption

A focus on mortgage rates

Trump says he’ll bring down mortgage rates to make homebuying more affordable, even though the president doesn't set mortgage rates or interest rates (though his or her policies can affect them).

Sponsor Message

At a rally last month in Arizona, Trump lamented the prevailing mortgage rates. Rates were then a little over 6%, but Trump overstated them by several points.

“Today the mortgage rates are at 10%, 11%, 12%, you can't get the money. We're going to bring it down very fast, we're going to bring energy down. We will drive down the rates so you will be able to pay 2% again and we will be able to finance or refinance your homes drastically,” he said.

During the pandemic, mortgage rates did dip below 3% at the end of Trump's presidency. But it's been more than three decades since they were at 10%, and they're far below that level now.

Trump says he’ll bring mortgage rates down by slashing inflation. But inflation has cooled significantly, and many economists say that other aspects of Trump’s economic plans would make inflation worse.

A crackdown on immigration

Trump and his vice-presidential nominee JD Vance have blamed undocumented immigrants for driving up housing prices. At the vice presidential debate last month, Vance said competition from illegal immigrants is one of the most significant drivers of home prices in the U.S.

This is another exaggeration, though there is some effect.

Immigrants do increase housing prices, just like any population growth does, if supply doesn't keep up with demand, according to Albert Saiz, associate professor of urban economics and real estate at MIT.

But the effect is not nearly as large as the Trump campaign has made it sound.

“That effect is relatively small,” Saiz says, and it cannot account for much of the rise in rent prices. One analysis found rents have increased 19% since 2019, rising 1% this year.

The effect on housing prices would be larger in an area where there is a higher concentration of immigrants, Saiz adds.

Trump has also talked about conducting a mass deportation of illegal immigrants, which would have a number of effects on the housing market. There would be fewer people in the country, decreasing demand for housing. But it would also remove a significant number of construction workers, which would likely make building new homes more expensive.

“My baseline view is that the deportation scheme that President Trump is discussing would increase home prices, not decrease home prices,” says Strain, the AEI economist. “But I think we know very little about what he actually has in mind.”
At the ceremonial weigh-ins for an Ultimate Fighting Championship event in Las Vegas over the summer, I could see why the fandom of this immensely popular MMA promotion has become something of a MAGA boogeyman in the 2024 election. Behind me at the T-Mobile Arena, a row of young white guys started yelling “WE LOVE YOU JOE ROGAN!!!!” whenever their favorite podcaster, sporting a Black Rifle Coffee T-shirt, announced each of the fighters on stage—and then all but hooted and beat their chests every time an American showed up to compete against a foreign fighter. Later, while I waited to take a piss, a pair of dudes almost got into a fight in the stadium’s men’s bathroom over their personal space. In the stands, I saw one kid rocking a T-shirt branded with the Trump mug shot, and another wearing a tee with the notoriously homophobic Sean Strickland juxtaposed with an American flag. Heading into the gender-gap election, the loudest bros of the UFC world were looking rather Trump-y.

It seems so obvious, at first. Where did Donald Trump himself go for comfort after he was convicted on 34 felony charges in New York? To a UFC showdown in New Jersey, where he arrived to roaring applause and launched his campaign’s TikTok account. Who’s been working as his campaign spokesman since 2016? Former UFC comms guy Steven Cheung. Who introduced Trump at the Republican National Convention in lieu of his wife, Melania? None other than UFC CEO Dana White, marking the executive’s third consecutive RNC address on behalf of his longtime friend and former business partner. (White and Trump’s friendship goes way back; in the early 2000s, Trump’s casinos were some of the only venues that would host UFC fights.)

Advertisement

And who got Trump to adopt a different media strategy from last time, introducing him to all the reactionary-lite influencers who’ve been eagerly hosting Trump on their podcasts? White again, who shares with his pal a tendency to denigrate the mainstream media and embrace the friendly bros (e.g., Theo Von) who command a wide audience of young American men.

And in the years since White endorsed Trump’s 2016 candidacy, quite a few popular fighters have ramped up their bigoted rhetoric. Conor McGregor, the brash, arrogant former champion from Ireland, baited his nemesis, Khabib Nurmagomedov—a stoic generational talent from Dagestan—by personally insulting him and his family with Islamophobic remarks. Colby Covington, who has made MAGA his whole brand, made racist comments against Black UFC fighters Tyron Woodley and Kamaru Usman that earned mass pushback from other mixed martial artists. Sean Strickland has repeatedly mused that women should go back to the kitchen instead of appearing in the ring. All three have plenty of fans who’ve stuck by them and defended all those actions. Recent features in national outlets have called the UFC a “MAGA breeding ground” and a “platform for MAGA ideology,” suggesting its fan base is being primed to vote for Trump, almost uniformly.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

But the personal perspective of fans, and even of proudly liberal top UFC fighters, has been notably missing in these kinds of stories. Mixed martial arts, which also extends far outside UFC, is a $12 billion industry with a lot of global fans—millions of regular viewers per match, across pay-per-view and cable, commanding the attention of an estimated 20 percent of the U.S. youth demographic (the overwhelming majority of those followers being men, even though women viewers are catching up). And not all UFC fans and fighters love Trump back. Almost an entire arena of them booed him in 2019. The UFC roster includes Black and brown women, Muslims, LGBTQ fighters, and nationals of at least 78 different countries. More than a few of its current and former stars have explicitly spoken out against Trump, in favor of Kamala Harris and the LGBTQ+ community, and in support of Palestine and Black Lives Matter and even the British Labour Party.

Advertisement

I wanted to find out for myself what some UFC fans thought of this new brand of politics ascribed to them, so I traveled to the UFC’s hometown of Las Vegas. The city is one of the most important campaign stops in the swing state of Nevada, and any locals I met there would also just happen to belong to one of the most coveted groups of voters this cycle. Trump himself probably believes he has these voters wrapped up. But in Nevada, despite the atmosphere at the weigh-in, I found a much more complicated reality.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Mixed martial arts is as messy, diverse, and unpredictable as America itself. It hails from a sweeping range of foreign countries and cultures—some of the most popular fighting styles come from Japan, Brazil, and Thailand—and started out in the U.S. as an underdog that grew into a cultural and, yes, political force.

Advertisement

As with most sports, the great majority of fans tend to watch from their homes or at designated bars. The die-hards who welcomed Trump at UFC right after his indictment paid up to $4,000 for the privilege, if they were in any of the good seats. And the people I met at those raucous, bro-y weigh-ins were mostly out-of-towners, the kind of tourists you encounter up and down the Las Vegas Strip. I knew a lot of the local fans likely didn’t hit up the designated UFC bars downtown or even live near that most crowded part of Vegas. So after getting acquainted with the version of UFC fandom you can see on TV, I ventured deeper into the Las Vegas Valley, to the smaller, quieter municipality of Henderson, about 15 miles south of the city.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Taking a car toward Henderson on Saturday, the day of the big match, the familiar glitz of the Strip gave way to vast swaths of undeveloped sand and endless transmission lines, interrupted only by occasional patches of trees, Spanish-language billboards, small hotels and malls, houses with rooftop solar panels, and fenced-off lots for sale.

Advertisement

I spotted plenty of signs for Republican candidates along the way, including Mark Robertson, the retired Army colonel trying once again to win the 1st Congressional District after failing to do so in the 2022 midterms, and Jeff Gunter, a Californian transplant who self-funded his unsuccessful run for the Republican Senate nomination.

The friendly driver who picked me was a lifelong Las Vegas Valley resident and UFC watcher to boot. Born and raised in North Las Vegas, Cristian, a Latino ex-car-mechanic with a cross around his neck, summarized his recent life and times for me in a smiley, “so it goes” tone: A few years ago, the pandemic lockdowns shut down the Valley and completely cleared the cities of their crowds, he said—but business was coming back, the population was growing again, and prices were going up. “It’s even harder to drive out here and get around than ever,” Cristian said. “It’s way more people than I’d ever seen out here back when I was growing up.”

Advertisement

I tried asking him what he thought about the presidential election. At that point in late June, a few weeks before Biden dropped out of the presidential race, Nevada was already earning outsize attention as one of this year’s battleground states. Even though it’s given its six electoral votes to Democrats in every cycle since 2008, current polling shows Trump and Harris tied neck and neck. Two-thirds of the voters in the state live in Clark County, home to Las Vegas and the surrounding cities like Henderson.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

And what Nevada voters actually believe is notoriously hard to pin down. Jon Ralston, editor in chief of the Nevada Independent, told me that polling in Nevada is perilous because a huge swath of voters—especially key young and Latino voters—are registered automatically as nonpartisan thanks to new voting-system overhauls implemented in the wake of the pandemic. As such, “It’s unclear what they do believe and what it will take to reach them.”

Advertisement

For many voters in the state, there’s just not clear enthusiasm for the available options. “You know who does really well in Nevada, more so than people ever really take a deeper look at?” said the City Cast Vegas podcaster Dayvid Figler, a lifetime Las Vegan. “A candidate named ‘none of the above.’ ” I knew a weekend with UFC fans would not tell me how Nevada will vote, but I was interested to hear how locals might be thinking about the presidential election this year.

The past few years have been so hectic, Cristian said, that he can’t even keep up with politics these days. “I should pay more attention, I know,” he said. “But things have just gotten so crazy here.” It was all a good reminder, I thought, of how most voters actually perceive the political realm on a day-to-day basis: just another overwhelming addition to the zaniness of reality.

Advertisement

He also mentioned that he found it harder to keep up with the UFC because it had ballooned so much from when he first began following it. “I was really into Ultimate Fighter in the early days,” he said, referring to the reality competition show that debuted on Spike TV in 2005 and massively expanded UFC’s reach and accessibility to general audiences. “I used to like being able to follow a couple guys, like Conor. Now it’s too much. It was already big, then it got too big. I’ll try to catch a fight sometimes, but I don’t know how to watch it all.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Cristian let me off at GoodLife, a three-floor bar in the center of Henderson with a café-style restaurant on the first floor, a digital casino and TV-saturated bar on the second, and an open, shaded rooftop on the third, with a bar, plenty of outdoor seating, and misters that constantly run to cool customers off.

Aside from the bartender, there was only one person actually braving the record-breaking 110-degree heat on the roof and watching UFC preliminaries on the wall-mounted TV­: a gregarious, stocky, bespectacled older man named Mike. I joined him as he kept track of how his bets were going on the ongoing lineup (not very many, at that point). I noticed that his T-shirt read “MY WIFE IS A MEXICAN” in all caps—a Christmas gift from his Guadalajara-born-and-raised spouse, Elsie, who was at that moment on the second floor with a group of his friends, all trying to avoid the sun.

As any fan knows, the UFC has a significant and influential roster of Mexican and Mexican American fans; they even gave Strickland a piece of their minds when he dissed their flag. The promotion has now staged multiple events in the U.S. commemorating Mexican Independence Day, including an elaborate September show that White, the UFC CEO, staged as a “love letter” to the country, displaying everything from Aztec clothing to the battles waged “against centuries of colonial oppression.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Each UFC event consists of about a dozen one-to-one matchups between fighters from the same weight class, and there are usually some women’s fights on every card. The fights earlier in the night (the preliminaries) feature lesser-known up-and-comers; the biggest names and most-hyped matchups come later in the night, on the main card. As the preliminaries drew to a close, Mike’s friends gradually started coming upstairs to join him. First I met Elsie, her cousin, and a couple of Mike’s longtime buddies, who were rocking some thick beards and band tees dedicated to vintage punk outfits like the Misfits and NOFX. One of them, John, spoke with me at length about his job at DraftKings. Everyone was happy to have me join them for beer and brawls.

The fights mostly carried on without much reaction, except for some light grumbling as the guys marked off the matches where they’d put money on the wrong fighter. They weren’t all that interested in talking politics—but I did get some slight nods of assent when Rogan popped up on screen and I called him a “weird guy.”

As the night went on, I tried a few times to ask about politics or get their reactions to any of the hot-button topics displayed on screen (ads for Democratic Sen. Jacky Rosen’s reelection campaign, for example), but it seemed that the folks I was with had also mostly tuned out the culture wars surrounding the sport. Late last year, transphobic fans made a public show of canceling their UFC Fight Pass subscriptions and boycotting PPV broadcasts simply because the UFC had made Bud Light its official beer, post–Dylan Mulvaney uproar. (Dana White went on Tucker Carlson’s podcast to defend doing business with Anheuser-Busch and claimed that “if you’re a patriot, you should be drinking gallons of Bud Light.”)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

At GoodLife, my companions didn’t comment at all on the frequent Bud Light ads that played throughout the broadcast, and shrugged at my questions about that whole controversy. It was just another spinoff of the UFC world that wasn’t worth keeping up with.

They were, however, quite vocal about how UFC had gone downhill in recent years. Mike told me about having been a fan for decades—signing up for the cheaper pay-per-views, grabbing tapes to catch individual fights, following Dana White’s ascent from well-connected, Vegas-schooled businessman to international sporting titan. Mike and John also give White credit for his “brilliance” in taking MMA from being a fringe sport in the U.S. and making it into something so professionalized and popular—almost too popular, now with a whole elaborate universe all its own. Lately, White has been pursuing side projects like the Contender Series, a reality show where fighters vie for an official UFC contract, and the Power Slap, a more recent venture that streams for free on the right-wing video platform Rumble and features combatants who take turns, yup, slapping each other on the face, as hard as they can, no defense.

“I used to watch all these title fights all the time,” Mike said. “Now with the number of them, it feels like a full-time job to keep up. I don’t know who half these people are.”

What they were keener to talk about was life in Henderson, a city they’d lived in and loved for a long time now—including for the MMA connection. Mike told me about running into Henderson-based fighters around town, about the influx of new breweries into the Water Street District (including the one we were sitting in, courtesy of an Oregon-based company that only recently expanded into Nevada), and how UFC had helped turn Vegas into more of a sporting town than it had been before, prior to the introduction of teams like the Golden Knights and the Aces.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Mike and John also took some time to grumble, unprompted, over the difficulty of getting consistent, reliable solar-power hookups for their Henderson homes, having heard from friends about the trials involved with getting utilities to comply with reasonable rates, especially as the need for air conditioning jacked up energy demand. “You can get a panel attached to just one appliance and you’re all set,” Mike said. “I don’t see the big deal.”

He could have said that about any of the controversies around his favorite sport. As with most people I’d met in Vegas, the creeping specter of MAGA-dom that has become associated with the UFC was just another distracting sideshow.

For the latter portion of the UFC event, I took off for another Henderson bar, DJ’s All-American Tavern. DJ’s, tucked away in an outdoor strip mall, had also only opened recently, but it heavily promoted its endless screens and convenience for viewing events.

The place was packed with eager viewers, to the point I had to jostle through people to even get a place to stand at the bar in a good viewing angle under the TV. While waiting for my beer, I chatted with the burly, bald man next to me: Donny, with a lengthy, wispy gray beard, and a yellow “Don’t Tread on Me” T-shirt.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

He seemed to be there more out of viewing habit than anything. Like the others, he thought modern-day UFC was too much to keep up with. “I miss the simplicity of Ultimate Fighter,” Donny mumbled over his Budweiser. “You could watch just two guys at a time, doing their thing. Now it’s all, I don’t even know what.”

I bade Donny goodbye once a seat opened near the far left-hand side of the bar, and took a chair next to Jon Lankert, who’s lived in the Valley since he was 6 and now works as a partner and vice president for a local IT consulting firm. We shared some laughs over the shit-talk spewed by Michael “Venom” Page, the Black British welterweight who’d walked out to a custom diss track targeted at his opponent, Ireland’s Ian Garry. We then sucked our teeth as Garry quickly took Page down, flouting the odds that had been projected for the night.

When we weren’t glued to the other fights on the card, we got into a politics discussion that was much more spirited than anything I’d had that day. Lankert, a fan since UFC 1 in 1993 and an appreciator of the UFC’s long imprint in Las Vegas, absolutely tore into Dana White, a figurehead he’d “loved for a long time” who he said now seems to have “outgrown” the promotion that made him.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

“The thing that irritates the hell out of me is how Dana White says that he believes in freedom of speech but then he exiles people,” Lankert said. “When fighters made any type of controversial statements before, earlier, they kinda nipped that. Now they don’t care, like Sean Strickland can say his homophobic nonsense and nobody does anything. Can you imagine an NFL player going off like that?”

When I asked Lankert who he’d want as president, he said he thinks Mark Cuban, as a successful billionaire willing to stand by his left-leaning views, would be the best person for the job. Lankert said he had been planning to vote for Joe Biden, and when I followed up with him by phone later in the summer, he said he was going to vote for Kamala Harris.

Lankert’s main political concerns were about making sure that communities like Henderson can thrive economically; he didn’t seem as interested in the culture war stuff. He enjoys UFC for the entertainment and likes following individual fighters—at the end of the day, he said, he cares more about their skills than their politics. “People say nonsense all the time,” he shrugged. “There were really no politics in the UFC until Trump, and it was Dana’s endorsement when I saw the difference. You never talked about politics. The fan base was kind of toxic, but they’re even more toxic now than before.”

Lankert pointed to the city’s Galaxy Theatre, where he sometimes goes to watch screenings of fights alongside dozens of other MMA fans. “If Trump is there, probably two-thirds of the audience cheers every time they see him.”

The scene at DJ’s wasn’t so brazen. No one cheered when Donald Trump Jr. showed up on the screen, sitting cageside. One guy did walk past us in a “Let’s Go Brandon” T-shirt with a U.S. flag, but another strolled by with a “Spread Cheeks Not Hate” shirt. The people there were invested in the fights, but there was no screaming at the screen or any hint that an undue escalation could occur. The vibes weren’t unsettled by the time the main event ended. I’d had a helluva lotta fun across Henderson that day, even though I’d never been there before, much less attended a UFC viewing party in the heart of it all.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

To give me another local perspective on MMA and politics, Lankert connected me with his barber, Elliott Chester, a 20-year Las Vegas Valley resident with two salons, who’s both a UFC fan and the man a number of fighters trust to cut their hair.

“I think most people know someone who trains or works out in the gym or someone who fights,” he told me on the phone, taking a beat from his nonstop schedule of appointments to chat. “It’s really a big part of the culture of Las Vegas. I always tell folks, ‘Hey, man, when you’re in Vegas, don’t be road-raging and acting crazy. There’s a lot of fighters out here, man. Make sure you look at these dudes’ ears. If you can do the cauliflower, you better be on your best behavior.’ ”

Despite those warnings, his affection for the local UFC community, local and national, shone through. “I love the sport. I love the camaraderie,” he said. “And I love the respect that the athletes show each other when they’re competing against each other.

“The political commentary in that atmosphere? I really don’t even pay attention to it,” he said when I asked the inevitable question. “I don’t think the president really, on a daily basis, affects my life or my business that much. It’s more of a state or local thing that’s going to affect my business and my life personally.”

Asked about his own politics, he said he doesn’t quite identify with either side of the two-party system. “Some things I tend to lean conservative, some things I lean liberal. I think I’m like most Americans. I don’t want the government in my business. I want to run my business. I also don’t want them involved in, nor do I think they need to be involved in, my personal life and personal decisions and personal choices—any choices that men or women make with their bodies or how they choose to live their lives. I tend to lean left, but that doesn’t mean I haven’t voted conservative in the past based on the issues at hand.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Chester felt burned by how the Democratic governor at the time (who ended up serving one term) handled the fallout of COVID closures. “It felt like there was a rule set for the major companies on the Strip, and then there was a rule set for the rest of us, the small business owners,” Chester said. “They got these exceptions, or they were given more leeway, and we got left with the shaft.” He also praised Dana White for flouting the restrictions on sporting events and managing to keep a steady stream of UFC fights going from May 2020 onward, crowdless though they may have been. “I tell you, man, we really needed that at the time. And I’m grateful for it.”

After my trip to the Las Vegas Valley, I came away with two conclusions: UFC fans clearly have a more complex range of political views than the popular media narrative might lead you to believe. And the candidate who makes the most convincing pitch on day-to-day quality of life issues will probably be the one who speaks to the voters that the polls have such a hard time figuring out.

Chester said he was impressed with how Harris had changed the energy of the race, but it was still hard to tell how it would all play out. “It seems like it’s going to be a pretty close match,” he said. “It’s going to be interesting to see.”
is a senior politics reporter at Vox, where he covers the Democratic Party. He joined Vox in 2022 after reporting on national and international politics for the Atlantic’s politics, global, and ideas teams, including the role of Latino voters in the 2020 election.

The 2024 election cycle has produced some stunning and sometimes counterintuitive narratives about how demographic subgroups might end up voting. We may just see a historic gulf in the way men and women vote — or not. Polls suggest we’re in for the greatest racial realignment since the Civil Rights Act was passed — or it could be a mirage. Young people might sit out the election because they’re disillusioned and vote for a third party — or they could turn out in record numbers for Kamala Harris. The more diverse Sun Belt states might pave the way for a Donald Trump victory — but the predominantly older and whiter “Blue Wall” states might elect the first Black woman president.

The Election, Explained A pop-up newsletter explaining the 2024 election — the candidates, the issues that matter most, and how it will all impact your life. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

We’ll know soon enough. Though Election Day is mere days away, at least 60 million people have already voted. Battleground states are hitting or exceeding their records for early voting. And with polls of likely voters still showing an evenly tied race, any combination of factors, events, or movements within the electorate could swing the outcome.

To that end, I’ve assembled a handful of questions we at Vox have been tracking for the last year. Their eventual answers could determine who wins the White House.

Will there be late deciders? And what might change their minds?

The story of the closing weeks of the 2024 election has been a scramble for undecided voters, a shrinking number in poll after poll. That share includes two groups: voters who are undecided between either candidate and voters who might have a preference but are undecided about voting at all.

We don’t exactly know who these late deciders are, though. Could they be the same kind of working class and non-college educated (primarily white) voters who boosted Trump to victory in Rust Belt states in 2016 (thus scrambling the polls)? Or are they going to be the scores of new and young (primarily nonwhite) voters who could give Harris an edge in Sun Belt states?

And for all these subgroups — what kind of message or campaign development might get them to vote that hasn’t persuaded them already? Could Harris’s late-in-the-game revival of democracy and Trump’s authoritarian bend resonate with them? Is something like the racist and extreme rhetoric at Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally a factor that could make up their minds? Or is something like President Joe Biden’s “garbage” gaffe this week something that could juice more Trump support?

Regardless, these late-deciders will be pivotal. They’ve broken for Trump by massive margins in each of the last two elections he’s been a part of. But things might be different this third time.

Will there be Republican crossover to Harris?

Along those lines, Harris’s fate-of-democracy appeal and juxtaposition of her “to-do” list against Trump’s “enemies” list are the clearest examples of how the Democrat’s campaign has zeroed in on Trump-skeptical Republicans as a key part of preventing a Trump win. But will these registered Republicans cross party lines, or simply repeat as reluctant Trump voters?

Somewhere between 15 and 20 percent of Republican primary voters did not vote for Trump, and even after she dropped out, large shares of these voters opted to vote for former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. Many of them are women, which explains part of the focus Harris has put on touting Republican endorsers like former GOP Rep. Liz Cheney, her father and former vice president Dick Cheney, and scores of former Never-Trump Republican politicians.

Partisanship is one hell of a drug, however. Republicans, even if they dislike Trump personally, routinely stick with their party’s nominee. Harris keeps asking these Trump-wary Republicans to put “country over party.” But if they don’t and Harris’s argument about Trump’s threat to democracy is right, they may have to throw a “country over” party.

Will Arab American voters drift toward Republicans?

The Gaza War, and Israel’s treatment of Palestinians, has been one of the defining issues of the last year, including in the electoral realm. Biden’s handling and response drove a significant amount of dissatisfaction from more progressive and left-leaning members of the Democratic coalition, and that antipathy seems to have stuck around, to a lesser degree, toward Harris. That includes a voting group influential in a pivotal swing state: Arab American voters in Michigan.

Polls specifically of Arab Americans suggest that these voters will not turn out for Harris to the same degree that they boosted Democratic candidates in the past: An Arab News-YouGov poll this week found Trump leading Harris among Arab Americans 45 to 43. That’s a stark reversal from 2020, when Biden led Trump by 24 points, and especially 2016, when Hillary Clinton led Trump by 34 points.

But this wasn’t always the case. Before 9/11, Arab American voters leaned Republican. Only after the GOP’s anti-Muslim and anti-Arab turn during the George W. Bush years did this voting segment swing toward Democrats, reaching a high point in 2004. And since that high point, these voters have been trending toward the GOP, with the share supporting John McCain, Mitt Romney, and Trump growing from 2008 to 2012 and into 2020 (support dipped slightly in 2016). The Gaza War may be accelerating a latent rightward shift that was already happening as the GOP changed its foreign policy priorities, championed conservative culture war issues, and talked up economic populism as Democrats became more culturally progressive, including on issues of gender and sexuality.

Will Trump’s gamble on younger Black men pay off?

For much of the last year, the Trump campaign has played up its targeted outreach to a specific segment of the electorate: Black men. With an avalanche of digital advertising aimed at younger Black men, and deployment of surrogates and outside groups to reach young Black voters, the campaign has hoped to exploit two dynamics: Harris’s apparent weakness with Black men, and an overarching vulnerability Democrats have with younger Black Americans.

Traditional polling suggests Harris has been facing a challenge in hitting the same margin of support that past Democratic candidates have enjoyed among Black voters, and specifically Black men. Both social and economic reasons explain this, including former President Barack Obama’s theory that a degree of misogyny is keeping some Black men from supporting a Black woman.

But there is also a larger Democratic weakness, based on surveys finding that younger Black voters specifically may have weaker ties to the party than older cohorts of Black voters, and may be more conservative than their elders. And young Black men appear more likely this year to support Trump, perhaps as a product of that weaker bond.

But this is also among the cohort of voters least likely to vote and which, some polling suggests, is consolidating for Harris as they tune into the election. And with more outright racist remarks and prejudiced speech being deployed by Trump and his supporters in the final weeks of the campaign, it’s not clear that this investment will materialize large enough gains on Election Day to swing races in battleground states.

Will Latino voters shift right in the states that matter?

Whether Latino voters are shifting toward the Republican Party since the start of the Trump years isn’t really contestable. Trump’s gains in 2020 stuck around for Republican candidates during the 2022 midterms, and polls suggest he will, at the very least, hang on to much of the support in a week. But because the election is decided by the Electoral College and not the popular vote, the more interesting question is whether those gains will stick around or grow in the states that matter.

In 2020, much of the political media was captivated by the massive inroads Trump made in South Florida and south Texas, places that had given Democrats an advantage in Latino support for years. But Trump’s Hispanic gains also happened across the country, in primarily immigrant communities, and in both Democratic and Republican strongholds that don’t necessarily impact the results of the Electoral College map.

This year, it appears that states that are already likely to solidly back Trump or Harris might see their Latino populations continue shifting to the right (as is most obvious in Florida), even as Latino voters in swing states like Arizona, Nevada, and Pennsylvania, according to polling, buck that trend and move toward Democrats (or at least keep Democratic margins from 2020 intact).

That could result in Trump making larger national inroads among Latinos, but not enough in swing states to boost him in the presidential races that matter. It would make for more evidence of an ongoing racial realignment between parties, but one driven by Hispanic and Latino voters in California, New York, and Texas. That has real implications for control of Congress, but, unless the Latinos switching their party affiliations are in swing states, it won’t affect who wins the White House.

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
CNN —

Before Election Day has even arrived, the “Stop the Steal” movement has reemerged in force, with some of the same activists who tried to overturn former President Donald Trump’s 2020 loss outlining a step-by-step guide to undermine the results if he falls short again.

For months, those activists – who have been priming Trump supporters to believe the only way the former president can lose in 2024 is through fraud – have laid out proposals to thwart a potential Kamala Harris victory. Their plans include challenging results in court, pressuring lawmakers to block election certification, and encouraging protests – culminating on January 6, 2025, the day Congress will once again certify the results.

“I have a plan and strategy,” Ivan Raiklin, a former Green Beret and political operative who has close ties to associates of Trump, told a group of Pennsylvania activists earlier this month. “And then January 6th is going to be pretty fun.”

Ivan Raiklin discusses January 6, 2025 Source: Ford Fischer / News2Share

Trump’s allies – and the former president himself – are increasingly pushing debunked claims of voter fraud, spreading their rhetoric through podcasts with massive audiences, megachurch sermons and political rallies in key states. Some Trump backers, including pastors associated with Christian nationalist ideas, have described the election as a fight between good and evil, describing Harris as the antichrist or suggesting that God has anointed Trump as the victor.

Four years ago, Trump’s unsuccessful efforts to overturn his loss to President Joe Biden didn’t truly materialize until after the election. They were largely improvised and ad hoc, with a flurry of hastily filed lawsuits that went nowhere and efforts to convince state legislators to block certification that fell short.

Ivan Raiklin speaks at the Rod of Iron Freedom Festival, which the organizers call "the largest open carry rally in America," in Greeley, Pennsylvania, on October 12. Brian Snyder/Reuters

But this time around, MAGA activists have been planning to undermine a potential Harris victory well in advance of the election, with some even arguing that state legislators should simply ignore the election results and award electoral votes to Trump by default.

Congress passed a measure in 2022 that makes it harder to overturn a certified presidential election, and with Trump now out of office, he and his allies cannot wield levers of the executive branch to try to influence the election. But experts say that the people involved in these conspiracy theory-driven efforts appear to be better organized, more determined and, in some cases, more extreme than four years ago.

Federal law enforcement officials are also ringing alarm bells. A bulletin put out earlier this month by the Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Bureau of Intelligence warned that extremist rhetoric about the election could motivate people to “engage in violence, as we saw during the 2020 election cycle.”

Marc Harris, a former investigator for the House select committee that investigated January 6, 2021, told CNN he’s concerned that the tactics to undermine the election have evolved since 2020, even with the safeguards put into place since then.

“Those looking to overturn the election are way ahead of where they were in 2020,” said Harris. “But on the flip side, the pro-democracy defenders are also more prepared. How that shakes out is not clear to me.”

Baseless fears of a ‘steal’

Unfounded claims about malign forces conspiring to cheat Trump out of an otherwise inevitable election win have been increasing in recent weeks from influential members of the MAGA movement.

“Yes, the steal is happening again,” Emerald Robinson, a right-wing broadcaster with nearly 800,000 followers on X, declared in a blog post earlier this month, criticizing the fact that votes may take days to count in some states. “It doesn’t take days to get election results. It takes days to cheat.”

Patrick Byrne, the former Overstock.com CEO who donated millions of dollars to efforts investigating the 2020 election, warned on Telegram this week of a cyberattack that would rig the election and lead to imminent “death and cannibalism” unless Americans stand together.

And Greg Locke, a prominent Tennessee pastor who spoke near the Capitol the day before the January 6 riot, told his followers in a sermon earlier this month that the US would be hit with “a catastrophic storm that is going to be man-made” in the days before the election, as an apparent method of stealing the vote.

“If Kamala wins this election, hear me when I tell you, we will never have another one,” Locke predicted.

Some of the debunked ideas that surfaced after the 2020 election and sought to explain how Trump lost remain rampant, such as the notion that voting machines are flipping votes to favor Democrats or that election officials in swing states have been complicit in widespread voter fraud.

Video Ad Feedback CNN reporter spent 24 hours consuming MAGA media. See the important trend he found 03:40 - Source: CNN

“The same systems are being used. Many of the same players are in place,” Joe Hoft, who has contributed to the conspiracy-theory-peddling website The Gateway Pundit, told CNN when asked about the 2024 election. “I don’t trust the process. The process is broken.”

In recent episodes of “War Room,” a prominent program airing election conspiracy theories started by former Trump adviser Steve Bannon, guests have repeatedly suggested that Democratic governors in swing states or Democratic members of Congress could block certification of a legitimate Trump victory.

They’ve cited comments like Democratic Maryland Rep. Jamie Raskin telling Axios earlier this month that he didn’t assume Trump would use “free, fair and honest” means to win – even though Raskin said he would “obviously accept” a Trump victory if it was honest.

“They call us election deniers all the time,” GOP Georgia Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene said on a “War Room” episode last week, in which she raised concerns about overseas military voting. “But it looks, it appears to be that there is a big fight being set up over the certification of the election and the outcome of the election.”

Greene has also floated a conspiracy theory that recent US Capitol Police training exercises are connected to a plan by congressional Democrats to keep Trump out of power even if he wins.

Trump himself has echoed some of the conspiracy theories pushed by his supporters, suggesting that election fraud is rampant in 2024. But party officials have struck a different tone.

“You can trust American elections,” Lara Trump, his daughter-in-law and the Republican National Committee co-chair, said on a call with reporters Wednesday. Touting her party’s election-integrity efforts, she said that “we want to make people all across this country feel good about the process of voting in the United States of America.”

“President Trump, Team Trump, and the RNC have been incredibly consistent and clear: we are actively working to protect the vote and all Americans must get out and vote to make this election TOO BIG TO RIG,” Karoline Leavitt, a spokesperson for the Trump campaign, told CNN.

Plans to block a Harris win

While some groups have been gathering supposed examples of election fraud for lawsuits to challenge a potential Harris win, other pro-Trump activists have coalesced around a plan to ensure Trump returns to the White House: state legislators can simply allocate their state’s electors for Trump regardless of vote counts.

The strategy generated headlines last week after Rep. Andy Harris, the chairman of the hard-right House Freedom Caucus, said it “makes a lot of sense” to allocate electors that way in North Carolina, where he suggested damage from Hurricane Helene may disenfranchise some voters.

Harris, who later walked back his comments, initially voiced support for the proposal after hearing a presentation from Raiklin, who’s known for having posted a memo that argued then-Vice President Mike Pence could have blocked certification of the 2020 election results.

Raiklin has been espousing the plan for legislators to seize control of awarding electoral votes in various states in recent weeks and receiving support from other far-right figures. Mark Finchem, a Republican candidate for state senate in Arizona, wrote on X that the “extraordinary circumstances” in North Carolina – a reference to the hurricane damage – “provide a justifiable pathway for the legislature to take action.”

Noel Fritsch, publisher of the far-right online publication National File, has argued that the US Constitution gives all state legislatures the power to choose electoral college members, which he told CNN he believes could create more national stability.

“Any movement toward direct democracy is, of course, as history shows, a move toward chaos, and that’s what we’re seeing,” Fritsch said. He cited arguments from some Republican Florida legislators who claimed they had the power to a select a slate of electors during the razor-thin 2000 presidential race.

But the recent proposal from people like Fritsch and Raiklin is rife with flaws, according to legal experts and officials. Karen Brinson Bell, the executive director of North Carolina’s election board, called the proposal a “violation of law,” and officials in the state have said that voting is proceeding without major issues despite the impact of the hurricane.

Derek Muller, a law professor at the University of Notre Dame, told CNN that state legislatures would have to first repeal their laws that dictate how elections operate before appointing electors directly.

“It’s too late for the legislatures to act,” Muller said. “You’d have to go through and remove all those laws on the books, and if you’re doing that in the middle of this moment when there’s already elections happening, then you’re going to risk due process violation of changing the rules arbitrarily.”

Concerns about violence

Incidents of political violence and threats have already occurred this year, including two apparent attempts to assassinate Trump, shootings involving a DNC office and suspicious packages mailed to election offices.

In the weeks ahead of the election, some pro-Trump activists have been openly alluding to more violent chaos that they say is on the horizon.

Donald Trump’s former national security adviser Michael Flynn said on a program last week that he thought Trump would win all 50 states if there’s a fair election but offered a grim prediction if the winner remains unknown for days.

“I feel like people are going to go to those locations where there’s counting and there could actually be violence because people are going to be, people are so upset after 2020,” said Flynn, who four years ago drew comparisons to Civil War battlefields in a speech the day before the Capitol riot.

A noose is seen on makeshift gallows as supporters of US President Donald Trump gather on the West side of the US Capitol in Washington DC on January 6, 2021. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP/Getty Images

Some extremists are already preparing “violent activity that they link to the narrative of an impending civil war, raising the risk of violence against government targets and ideological opponents,” according to a DHS memo from September obtained by the watchdog group Property of the People and shared with CNN.

Posts in recent months on the obscure message board 8kun, formerly 8chan, have called for violence against undocumented immigrants and urged “election steal defense prep,” while messages on a forum called “The Donald” encouraged violent shows of “force” to stop the “steal,” according to an October bulletin from Colorado’s Department of Public Safety also obtained by Property of the People.

On Telegram, violent rhetoric related to election denialism has more than quadrupled over the course of October, according to the Global Project Against Hate and Extremism, a nonprofit that tracks such content.

But unlike 2020, more extremist groups may have moved their discussions off public online forums and into private chats, hiding online conversations that may involve planning for the days after the election, said Devin Burghart, the executive director of the Institute for Research and Education on Human Rights, a nonprofit that studies far-right movements.

Still others have cast the stakes of the election in foreboding, apocalyptic terms.

Speaking this month at a political rally known as the ReAwaken America Tour, Pastor Mark Burns of South Carolina called on supporters to keep Harris out of power by any means necessary.

“Is there anybody standing with me who would do whatever it takes to make sure she’s not the next president of the United States? Because we are at war,” Burns said. “This is about good versus evil, of a real enemy come from the gates of hell.”

Asked about his comments, Burns told CNN he was referring to spiritual war and that he condemns “talks of physical violence in any form if in the unlikely event that President Donald Trump loses the election.”

CNN’s Zachary Cohen contributed to this report.
Americans bet $100 million on Trump v. Harris, but at what cost?

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

An election betting advertisement flashed on screen during coverage of former President Donald Trump's rally at Madison Square Garden this weekend on the Right Side Broadcasting Network, a conservative media company.

"Bet on the US election," the ad for Kalshi said as Trump spoke on stage. "Bet $100 on Trump, Get $175."

More than $100 million has been legally wagered on the presidential race on the platform, days out from Election Day. This explosion in legal betting comes after a federal appeals court earlier this month allowed KalshiEX LLC, an online-betting company, to open an election prediction market.

Sponsor Message

The company's CEO, Tarek Mansour, told NPR his election market — which shows a 63% chance of Trump winning as of Tuesday — is a "mechanism for truth" and help regular people hedge against unpredictable political risk. But critics like Sen. Jeff Merkley, D-Ore., have called the legal decision a "huge mistake" that harms American democracy.

Kalshi is still battling federal regulators in court. But retail investing platform Robinhood also started offering bets on election contracts this week. That leaves Americans free to make tens of millions of legal election bets, with little known about how they will impact one of the closest and most contentious presidential elections in decades.

Betting on U.S. elections

Wagering on the U.S. presidential election is nothing new. Bets on presidential candidates were common during the turn of the 20th century. Betting commissioners in New York City controlled these markets at a place called the New York Curb Exchange.

Not only did bets occur, the markets were fairly accurate during a time before scientific political polls, according to NPR's former gambling correspondent and current editor Keith Romer.

"Of the 15 presidential elections between 1884 and 1940, the betting market correctly calls the race in 11," Romer told NPR's Planet Money. "It's too close to call in three. And they only get one wrong."

Sponsor Message

Major papers, like The New York Times, would publish the betting odds as a source of information, Romer said. But in the latter half of the 20th century, during the advent of scientific polling and a number of prohibitive gambling laws, election betting fell out of favor.

In recent years, prediction markets have brought election betting back. On the social media platform X, the Trump campaign, tech billionaire Elon Musk and pollster Nate Silver often post the latest presidential betting odds on Polymarket, an offshore prediction market U.S. citizens can only use illegally.

To date, $2.5 billion has been bet on the presidential election on Polymarket, which also gives the former president a 66% chance of election victory. Suspicious activity has raised questions about the site's accuracy: Blockchain researchers cited by Fortune say there's evidence some one-third of the volume on Polymarket's presidential betting market is artificial.

Kalshi for the first time gives Americans a legal platform for their wagers, which CEO and co-founder Mansour argued offers voters accurate information, in contrast to political polling.

Rajiv Sethi, a professor of economics at Barnard College who has been studying these markets for years, said the "jury is still out" on whether prediction markets are better than traditional political polling — but it's close.

"They generate outputs that are actually quite competitive with the best models," Sethi said.



Affecting election outcomes?

Mansour, the CEO, said the goal is to broaden election betting to the general public, similar to the creative financial vehicles that are available to hedge risks for "high-net-worth individuals" at investment banks like Goldman Sachs, his former employer.

He gave the example of an environmental company protecting itself against the election of a candidate who proposes slashing climate change initiatives.

"People can now do something about it," Mansour said. "They can reduce their exposure and volatility towards events that they don't really have control over."

Sponsor Message

When asked about nefarious betting meant to falsely inflate the odds of a given candidate, Mansour said election markets are "self-correcting" because bettors will see an opportunity to make money on an inflated outcome.

"The only outcome is basically — the people who tried to manipulate in the first place lost a lot of money,” Mansour said during an interview conducted when the Kalshi odds mirrored those of public polls.

Mansour admitted election betting isn't a zero-risk proposition, but said Kalshi is federally regulated — meaning regulators would be able to intervene if someone tried to manipulate a market.

"Everything is super transparent and everyone can see anything you do and know your name and your address and what you're doing and the government is monitoring," Mansour said. "It feels like a pretty bad place to try to do any of these things."

Sethi, the Barnard professor, largely agreed, citing a 2012 case when an anonymous person bet $7 million to increase the odds of then-Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney winning the election, and failed when other gamblers caught on. But Sethi said there still is a potential for manipulation.

"Your belief about whether a candidate is viable, is doing well, is likely to prevail, can affect things like fundraising, support, the enthusiasm, volunteer effort and so on," Sethi said. "These things can actually affect the actual outcome of the election."

toggle caption Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images

'A huge mistake'

One week from Election Day, the Kalshi market favors Trump by over 30 percentage points — while most political polls show Harris and Trump statistically tied. This misalignment has raised questions about the accuracy of these markets.

Merkley, the Oregon senator, has opposed Kalshi from the start and proposed a bill in Congress to ban all election betting.

"Allowing election betting is a huge mistake," Merkley told NPR. "It turns elections from a place where you exercise your principles to where you exercise your pocketbook. It corrupts our American elections."

Sponsor Message

Beyond the moral challenge, Merkley said the law prohibits it. He says it's against Regulation 40.11 from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which prohibits trades on "terrorism, assassination, war, gaming, or an activity that is unlawful under any State or Federal law." The CFTC is fighting Kalshi in court.

"Gaming is betting on the outcome of a contest," Merkley said. "An election is a contest. These are not commodities. This is not oil. This is not silver."

Kalshi's Mansour said he knows election betting comes with a stigma of corruption, but argued the critique doesn't hold water.

"We fought for these markets not because we think they threaten election integrity," Mansour said. "On the contrary, we think they promote it."
Why are some Evangelicals drawn to — and sticking by — Trump? This pastor weighs in

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

On a late October evening in North Carolina's capital city, a massive stage in a dark auditorium is backlit by tall screens, and bass-thumping music and vocals are filling the space.

There's a table of judges in front of the stage. Think American Idol but with a clearly religious focus. It's worship team audition night at Cross Assembly Church inside the congregation's nearly 1,700-seat sanctuary on a sprawling, multi-wing campus that resembles a high school or community college.

This Pentecostal church is led by pastor Chad Harvey, whose sermons — often to weekly crowds of about 3,000 — usually feature on Cross Assembly's social media channels. Harvey says only a small part of his job intersects with politics, but there’s no way to completely avoid political discourse.

Sponsor Message

“If I thought the fate of history depended on the 2024 election, I'd be as anxious as you and popping as many pills you are. Fortunately, I don't believe that stuff,” he said in a sermon posted to social media over the summer. “My hope is in Jesus, not in the politics.”

These days, Evangelical and Pentecostal conservatives are a powerful force in Republican politics. And they have stuck by former President Donald Trump for three presidential elections in a row. In fact, in the closing weeks of a tight race in North Carolina, Trump has been appealing directly to religious conservatives.

In North Carolina, All Things Considered host Scott Detrow sat down with Harvey and talked about all of this — Trump, religion, politics in general — in a small side prayer room on Cross Assembly's campus.

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

Interview highlights

Scott Detrow: How much does politics come up in day-to-day conversation when you're talking to people here, when you're talking to people in the congregation, when you're doing your pastoral work?

Chad Harvey: You know, it's very interesting. I think an outsider looking into the Evangelical Pentecostal movement would assume that politics plays a huge role in the life of the church. It actually doesn't. I'd say 1-2% of my conversations are about politics. I think a lot of people are just trying to make ends meet. They're trying to live their lives.

Sponsor Message

Now, I've told our folks this, you know, our church is accused of being a little bit too political, and I said: “You know, the church is not getting more political, politics is getting more spiritual.” And so we're seeing this infiltration into the political realm of things that used to be the church's territory: family, human sexuality. Now politics is starting to tackle those spiritual issues.

Detrow: How do you think about which candidates you are going to support? Is it through the lens of the issues they support? Is it through how they come across as individuals?

Harvey: What I've told our congregation is we look at the platform, not the person. And so you can have some people with some pretty deep moral struggles who are upholding a platform that we support. And I tell our people, don't pay as much attention to the struggles — pay attention to the platform. Because here's what the Bible says: There's none righteous. No, not one. We're all messed-up people. So whether it be some of the accusations that have been lodged at (North Carolina Lieutenant Governor) Mark Robinson recently, whether it be Kamala Harris and Willie Brown, Donald Trump telling Howard Stern the sexual revolution of the 1970s was “my personal Vietnam” — they're all messed-up people. And so that's the one thing we have to keep in mind as a congregation.

Detrow: Let me just ask the direct question about this with Trump. Donald Trump has such a high support from so many Christians around the country, and yet is somebody who lives in a gold tower with his name on it, who crudely insults people and, among other things, is facing criminal charges. And some people just feel like this is not the message, as I understand it, of Christianity, but there's such a strong support. What's the best way you explain it to someone who says, I just don't understand that?

toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed for NPR

Harvey: So I would say, again, I keep going back to we're all messed up people. Trump is messed up. Kamala Harris is messed up. Joe Biden has had accusations thrown at him. We're all messed-up individuals. And so I think what I keep coming back to is a lot of people seem to think that we're having a continuous, 24/7 Trump rally in the Evangelical Pentecostal circle. We're actually not. We're well aware of his foibles. We're well aware of where he's messed up. I think the reason Trump is resonating with Evangelicals is this mess aside that we all know about, the platform he's supporting, like it or not, is closer aligned to our view of scripture than the other side.

Sponsor Message

Detrow: Does that create a world, though, where there's never any accountability for anybody personally?

Harvey: I do think that at some point, there will be a line that's crossed. And so at that point, what I said is, sure, that's fine. Let's just make sure we're using that standard across the board. So, “This candidate did this. I can't support him.” That's fine. Don't support him. The only thing I'm asking is to use that same standard.

Detrow: You mentioned the lieutenant governor, Mark Robinson. I want to ask about that because I think one of the first things that drew us was that he's spoken to Cross Assembly in the past, and you've gotten to know him a little bit.

Harvey: Yeah. Yeah.

Detrow: What do you make of him as a candidate and as a man?

Harvey: You know, as a man, very winsome. I think one thing that drew him to a lot of individuals in our congregation is we have somebody in high political office who's talking our language. I've said many times about Mark Robinson, for every strength is a corresponding weakness. His strength is he's not part of the political system. The weakness is sometimes he talks like a man who's not part of the political system, and maybe he phrases things that make people uncomfortable. But as an individual, I really feel like the values that he espoused from the pulpit really resonated with our biblical worldviews.

Detrow: What I'm hearing is that line hasn't been crossed yet.

Harvey: Yeah. ...He did speak at our church, and I think some people see that and say, well, do you view him as a spiritual leader? Well, no, I don't. He's still a political candidate.

Detrow: I think we've talked about this in pieces here and there, but I want to give you a chance just to directly talk about it in one swoop. What do you think more secular listeners, listeners of other religious persuasions, listeners who live in other parts of the country — what do you think it is they misunderstand the most about congregations like yours?

Harvey: Wow. That's a great question. I would say, again, kind of putting my ear to the ground and seeing what's being said about the Evangelical Pentecostal voting bloc, I think one of the biggest misperceptions is that this is what is dominating our mind. This is what's really driving us. I keep hearing this term, Christian nationalism. That's been the big buzzword in 2024. I've not heard of that until this year that we're just trying to impose our Christian beliefs on this nation and make us a Christian nation. That may be true for other congregations. I don't know that that's true for a large segment of Evangelical Pentecostal Christians.

Sponsor Message

You know, the Bible says, make it your goal to live a peaceful and quiet life. I think a lot of us just want to have a peaceful and quiet life, be able to share the good news of Jesus Christ. I don't think we're driven by this desire to make America a Christian nation, and I don't think politics really occupies as big a part of our brain as people think it does.
As Election Day creeps closer, the tension is becoming more palpable. Pollsters are publishing their final surveys, millions are dropping their ballots in the mail and early in-person voting is beginning around the country. And there’s no more clarity on whether Vice President Kamala Harris or former President Donald Trump will prevail than there was two weeks ago.

As per the two parties’ usual demeanors, Republicans are blustering in public while stressing about Trump’s chances behind the scenes, while Democrats are simply stressed everywhere. But at least on paper, there’s good reason to be hopeful about Harris’ odds of victory. There are wide gaps across the board between the two campaigns, any of which could be the deciding factor next week.

There are wide gaps across the board between the two campaigns, any of which could be the deciding factor next week.

The most eye-catching advantage that Harris’ campaign holds is a massive war chest that’s rapidly built up since she took over as her party’s presumptive nominee in July. By early October, she had raised $1 billion between her campaign and a joint fundraising committee with the Democratic National Committee. And donors haven’t slowed the deluge of cash. In the first half of October alone, her campaign and affiliates reported to the Federal Election Commission that they’d raised another $147 million. In comparison, Trump’s network brought in $97 million during that same time.

Harris’ campaign is investing the money both in an advertising avalanche in battleground states and a gargantuan ground game. The Harris campaign has opened 50 offices in Pennsylvania alone, coordinating a massive get-out-the-vote operation. The same is true in Michigan, where her campaign is hoping to draw as many ‘Never Trump’ Republicans to the polls as possible. Trump’s campaign is struggling to match Democrats’ presence, having turned over most of its get-out-the-vote efforts to super PACs and other affiliated groups.

As for the candidates themselves, Trump may be benefiting from some voters’ hazy memories of his first term, but remarkably Harris has managed to wrest the title of “change candidate” from him in the eyes of many voters. That’s no mean feat when she’s the one currently serving in the administration under President Joe Biden. And Harris sought to remind voters just how chaotic Trump’s term was with her final major campaign address. Tuesday’s speech warning about the danger Trump poses was held on the Ellipse, the site of his speech Jan. 6, 2021, that inspired a mob to attack the Capitol.

Much of the campaign’s final days will be spent targeting the few remaining undecided voters, and one of the two candidates is better positioned to grow their support. The last national New York Times/Siena College poll found “about 15 percent of voters described themselves as not fully decided, and Ms. Harris is leading with that group, 42 percent to 32 percent.” It’s not clear how many of them will break for her but it’s still an encouraging sign. Furthermore, Harris’ favorability has rebounded since she entered the race. Though Trump’s popularity has increased as well since the first assassination attempt on him this summer, he is still decidedly unpopular. And his previous two presidential runs ended with roughly the same share of the popular vote, suggesting a clear ceiling of national support.

Harris also holds the advantage on one of the most motivating factors this election: abortion. The furious backlash to the overturning of Roe v. Wade drove Democrats’ overperformance in the 2022 midterms. There’s no sign that energy has dimmed in the last two years, particularly when numerous states this year have initiatives concerning abortion access on the ballot. Trump has tried to soften his rhetoric, only to boast about his Supreme Court nominees ending Roe.

Finally, even the economy has improved beyond what many would have predicted two years ago, with inflation falling back to pre-pandemic levels and interest rates falling. Harris is gaining on Trump in polls on that front, as well. And among demographic after demographic, the polls have been tightening in Harris’ favor.

With that nightmare still seared in every Democrat’s mind, the Harris camp won’t coast for the next week.

There are enough positive signs that, as The New York Times reported Monday, Harris aides are “growing cautiously optimistic” about the race. But the specter of 2016 still hovers over the election. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was ahead in the polls going into Election Day, had won her debates against Trump and seemingly held every possible edge against him. But that evening, it soon became clear that Trump would be able to claim victory, thanks in part to a surge of infrequent voters, a phenomenon his campaign is trying to replicate this time around.

With that nightmare still seared in every Democrat’s mind, the Harris camp won’t coast for the next week. There are still plenty of data points out there to give them the jitters. It truly seems like any little change in voter demographics, turnout or enthusiasm could swing things one way or the other.

Accordingly, Harris’ team has framed itself as the underdog for the entire time she’s been in the race. It’s a good mindset to have when things are this uncertain. Because while Harris has plenty of reasons to feel good about her odds on paper, it’s impossible not to worry that we could still see the whole thing go up in smoke.
America's first Native American cabinet secretary says she's righting historical wrongs

toggle caption Maansi Srivastava/for NPR

WASHINGTON, D.C. — The cavernous Stewart Udall Department of Interior Building may be just off the National Mall in Washington but it feels like a window into the Old West.

Past the nostalgic if peculiar Indian Craft Shop, there are striking New Deal-era murals of firefighting and farming, and an Ansel Adams photograph of the Acoma Pueblo in New Mexico. It's just a few miles from where Deb Haaland spent much of her childhood at her grandmother's rock home in Mesita Village, Laguna Pueblo.

"Our people were farming the desert for thousands of years," Haaland says, in her corner office upstairs.

Sponsor Message

As the department's first-ever native secretary, Haaland says she thinks about her elders and the U.S. government's historical policy of assimilation every day.

"My grandparents worked on the railroad for 45 years because of that," she says. "They were trying to get Indians out of their communities and into mainstream America."

toggle caption Maansi Srivastava/for NPR

America's traumatic boarding school legacy

With the next election just days out, it's still too early to say what historians will make of President Biden's legacy. But he will be remembered as the first President to appoint the country's first-ever indigenous cabinet secretary, and for making a formal apology this month over the U.S. government's historical forced assimilation policies in Indian Country.

Haaland traveled to the Gila River Indian Community near Phoenix Friday for the apology and has been unusually public lately giving interviews and making a closing pitch to tribes in swing states particularly, which she says are benefiting from a once in a generation federal investment.

Haaland has led the massive Department of Interior for close to four years now. One of Biden's main directives to her hasn't been an easy one to fulfill: righting the U.S. government's historical wrongs in Indian Country. But Haaland, who also oversees the Bureau of Indian Affairs, says she's proud of what she's accomplished so far, especially the recent conclusion of a nationwide healing tour focused on Indian boarding schools, at the heart of the president's apology.

Sponsor Message

"It's an important piece of our history that every single American should know about," she says. "It's a painful part of our history."

Haaland's grandmother was sent to a Catholic boarding school as a little girl. School children were punished for speaking indigenous languages. Many were abused or worse and there's still no full accounting of those who died.

"I think of that every single day, those voices resonate with me every single day, it is very, very painful," she says.



Interior's huge mandate

Haaland has also led Interior at a time of seemingly monumental social and environmental change in the West, where the DOI controls about a half billion acres of public land, including the national parks and monuments, cattle ranges and oil and gas fields.

On public lands management, Haaland hopes she'll be remembered for her work righting the historical wrongs by bringing long-ignored tribes to a seat at the table on decisions.

She's increased tribal co-management agreements tenfold since 2021.

"Tribal folks, they were our first land stewards. I feel we've done an excellent job of lifting up Indian affairs and making sure that, across the board, it's important to our entire department," Haaland says.

'Department of Intense Irony'

The irony of Haaland now leading Interior is not lost on her or historians. They point out that the agency was created after this country had fought off the British colonizers, only to then begin colonizing the American West.

"You could almost call it the Department of Intense Irony and still keep the same initials," says Patty Limerick, a western historian at the University of Colorado at Boulder. "There's no question that the Department of Interior comes into being to manage, direct and control Indian people."

But Limerick says Deb Haaland's appointment will mark an important turn.

toggle caption Maansi Srivastava/for NPR

"This is proof that we are not stuck with a historical legacy. This is proof that we have the power to say, 'let's change this,' " she says.

Sponsor Message

Indeed, across Indian Country, her appointment to lead federal agencies that long deprived native people of their wealth and power means a lot.

"Her legacy is that she empowered Indian Country," says Chuck Hoskin Jr., principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, one of America's biggest tribes. "She gave hope to a generation of young natives who look at a powerful native woman in a position of great power demonstrating strength."



Tribes are not a monolith

Haaland's appointment came with huge expectations. She herself points out that America's 574 federally recognized tribes are no monolith. And she's faced criticism for everything from tighter oil and gas drilling rules on the Navajo Reservation, to not intervening in a lithium mining boom in Nevada, on land tribes consider sacred.

Here's how the longtime chairman of the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony Arlan Melendez framed it, before retiring late last year: "We want her to come out here at least to explain to the tribes as to what she can do, you know, besides remaining silent on it."

Haaland says she's learned it's nearly impossible to be all things to everyone, and jokes that every day at least half the country is mad at her.

"With respect to some of these projects, they didn't start with this administration," Haaland says. "There were past administrations that were working on some of these things."

She also found herself on the defense more recently over the Not Invisible Act, which she got passed as a member of Congress in 2019. It created a commission to advise the Interior and Justice departments on their failure to solve missing persons and murder cases in native communities. Some members criticized her for not acting fast enough. Haaland is pleading for patience, saying native women have been trafficked since colonization, for 500 years.

toggle caption Maansi Srivastava/for NPR

"Can things happen faster? Of course things can always happen faster," Haaland says. "But we are moving forward on this issue when before, nobody cared about it."

Sponsor Message

Haaland won't say whether she'd stay on if a potential Kamala Harris administration were to ask. Donald Trump would likely roll back most of the Biden agenda, particularly a controversial new rule that allows public land to be leased for conservation instead of drilling.

But Cherokee chief Chuck Hoskin says Haaland has raised the bar such that future presidents will appoint leaders who empower Indian Country, not ignore it.

"We have seen over the decades progress, and then some level of retreat." Hoskin says. "I think overall we're on a path of progress in this country that's beyond party lines."

Secretary Haaland points to the historic $45 billion the administration set aside for tribes - for everything from clean water to schools to bringing electricity to homes that still don't have it.

"We're proud that tribes have had this once in a generation investment to make their communities better," she says. "You know there are tribes like the Hopi Tribe in Arizona who are able to electrify homes with solar power for the first time ever."

Haaland says she and the Biden administration have done things that will change native people's lives forever, no matter who's in charge next.
Kamala Harris’ closing campaign speech at the Ellipse on Tuesday evening was a mirror image of the Jan. 6, 2021, Ellipse rally that Donald Trump incited into violent insurrection. Whereas Trump’s remarks fueled distrust and even hatred of the democratic process, Harris’ speech sought to convince skeptical Americans that democracy is still a system worth protecting.

“Donald Trump has spent a decade trying to keep the American people divided and afraid of each other,” Harris told a crowd estimated at over 75,000 supporters who stretched from the Ellipse to the grounds of the Washington Monument. “I am here tonight to say: That is not who we are.”

Harris’ speech sought to convince skeptical Americans that democracy is still a system worth protecting.

That could be said as much about the fragile state of American democracy as about Harris’ toss-up of a race against Trump. Harris vowed to chart “a different path” from Trump’s division, pledging to “seek common ground and common-sense solutions to make your lives better.”

Harris’ remarks also offered a not-so-subtle throwback to 2020 and 2022, when President Joe Biden decided — against the advice of consultants and pundits — to focus his closing arguments on the importance of protecting democracy from authoritarian threats. Biden knew better than the commentators, and his decision to emphasize democracy fended off Trump in 2020 and the mythical Red Wave of 2022. Now Harris is hoping some of that magic rubs off on her own campaign.

It seems there’s reason for such hope. This week’s New York Times/Siena College poll found that nearly 8 in 10 Americans feel democracy is under threat. Voters also make no mistake about where that threat is coming from. As a growing number of his former Cabinet officials and military leaders have made clear over the past weeks, Trump poses a clear and present danger to our country’s most fundamental democratic safeguards.

There are plenty of voters who disagree with Harris’ reverence for democracy. One of them, former Trump aide Steve Bannon, was released from federal prison Tuesday after serving a four-month sentence for refusing to cooperate with the official investigation into the Jan. 6 attacks. One of Bannon’s first acts as a free man was to call on Trump to prematurely declare victory next Tuesday in an effort to undermine public faith in vote counting efforts.

Others are more direct. The House Freedom Caucus leader, Rep. Andy Harris, R-Md., made headlines last week when he floated the idea of simply giving North Carolina’s 16 electoral votes to Trump before the results are counted. Harris’ reasoning was that Trump would probably win the state anyway, so why bother with the inconvenience of democracy at all? The outrageous proposal drew hardly a peep of protest from Trump’s lapdog Republican lawmakers.

But Harris didn’t confine herself to a high-minded defense of democracy. After months of Trump’s putting Democrats on the back foot about the economy, she took the fight to the GOP with a powerful explanation of how four years of a “Trump sales tax” would be disastrous for people’s bank accounts.

Harris hammered Trump on trade, pointing out that his tariff policy would amount to “a 20% national sales tax on everything you buy that is imported. Clothes, food, toys, cellphones, a Trump sales tax that would cost the average family nearly $4,000 more a year.”

The high-priority focus on the economy in Harris’ remarks is an acknowledgment that many swing voters still trust Trump more on economic issues. But Harris also took the opportunity to press one of Trump’s economic weak spots: the continued popularity of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

The high-priority focus on the economy in Harris’ remarks is an acknowledgment that many swing voters still trust Trump more on economic issues.

“You will pay even more if Donald Trump finally gets his way and repeals the Affordable Care Act, which will throw tens of millions of Americans off their health insurance and take us back to when insurance companies had the power to deny people with pre-existing conditions,” Harris said to cheers. “Well, we are not going back.”

Abortion rights loomed large in Harris' speech, as they have throughout this campaign — the first presidential election since the Supreme Court repealed Roe v. Wade in 2022. “I believe in the fundamental freedom of Americans to make decisions about their own bodies,” Harris said. “I will fight to restore what Donald Trump and his hand-selected Supreme Court justices took away from the women of America.”

More than that, Harris made the case that America’s democracy is inextricably connected to its healthy economy and flourishing people. She argued that accepting the future Trump proposes requires gutting America’s economy and trampling fundamental human rights. Harris paid tribute to that idea in her closing moments, urging Americans to unite in “our pursuit of freedom, our belief in fairness and decency and our faith in a better future.”

In just one week, voters across the nation will have the opportunity to decide which future they want for their country and for themselves. Tonight, Harris made that choice clear.
Donald Trump’s Sunday night event at Madison Square Garden quickly became scandalous for a great many reasons, most notably the racist and misogynistic rhetoric peddled by the former president’s allies. But the Republican candidate’s own remarks at the gathering weren’t exactly anodyne.

As we’ve discussed, Trump, among other things, condemned Americans he disagrees with as “the enemy from within,” while describing the media as “the enemy of the people” — a phrase that echoed, among others, Joseph Stalin. The GOP nominee also lied uncontrollably, called the United States an “occupied” country, peddled familiar grievances and conspiracy theories, and presented a vision to the electorate that reflected his radicalism.

As Election Day 2024 neared, this was touted by his own campaign as Trump’s closing message to American voters — who saw a candidate present a dark and ugly platform. The New York Times described it as a “closing carnival of grievances, misogyny and racism.” A CNN report added that the Republican’s anti-migrant rhetoric ranked alongside “the most flagrant demagoguery by a major figure in any Western nation since World War II.”

Two days later, Vice President Kamala Harris stood at the Ellipse, just a block south of the White House, at the spot where her GOP opponent deployed a violent mob to attack his own country’s Capitol nearly four years ago. The Democrat’s closing message couldn’t have been more different from the one voters heard 48 hours earlier. NBC News reported:

Kamala Harris called on Americans to “turn the page” on the Donald Trump era at a rally Tuesday, rallying thousands of voters at the site where the former president addressed the mob that attacked the Capitol on Jan. 6. On a chilly fall evening one week before Election Day, the Democratic nominee criticized her Republican rival as “unstable, obsessed with revenge, consumed with grievance and out for unchecked power.” She vowed to govern as a pragmatist by listening to everyone, including “people who disagree with me.”

Among other things, I was struck by the patriotism gap. Trump’s closing message is rooted in a fundamentally dystopian vision: The United States, the Republican has begun saying in recent days, is a “garbage can.” Ours is a “failing nation” and a “nation in decline,” he’s declared. Told earlier this month that America is a great country, the former president said — out loud and on the record — that he disagreed.

It was against this backdrop that Harris stood at the Ellipse and told the country, “Nearly 250 years ago, America was born when we wrested freedom from a petty tyrant. Across the generations, Americans have preserved that freedom. Expanded it. And in so doing, proved to the world that a government of, by, and for the people is strong and can endure. ... They did not struggle, sacrifice, and lay down their lives, only to see us cede our fundamental freedoms, only to see us submit to the will of another petty tyrant.

“The United States of America is not a vessel for the schemes of wannabe dictators. The United States of America is the greatest idea humanity ever devised.”

As she spoke, many of her supporters waved American flags and signs emblazoned with “USA” and “Freedom.”

But also notable was the way in which the vice president reached out to voters exhausted, not only by the campaign, but also by the kind of politics Trump embraces and represents.

“America, we know what Donald Trump has in mind,” Harris said. “More chaos. More division. And policies that help those at the very top and hurt everyone else. I offer a different path. And I ask for your vote. And here is my pledge to you: I pledge to seek common ground and common sense solutions to make your lives better. I am not looking to score political points. I am looking to make progress.

“I pledge to listen to experts, to those who will be impacted by the decisions I make, and to people who disagree with me. Unlike Donald Trump, I don’t believe people who disagree with me are the enemy. He wants to put them in jail; I’ll give them a seat at the table.

“I pledge to approach my work with the joy and optimism that comes from making a difference in people’s lives. And I pledge to be a president for all Americans. To always put country above party and above self.”

Let no one say that the candidates are effectively the same and failing to offer voters a clear choice.
The following is adapted from a video that Sen. Sanders, I-Va., shared on social media on Monday. It has been lightly edited for style and clarity.

I understand that there are millions of Americans who disagree with President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris on the terrible war in Gaza. I am one of them.

While Israel had a right to defend itself against the horrific Hamas terrorist attack of Oct. 7, 2023, which killed 1,200 innocent people and took 250 hostages, it did not have the right to wage an all-out war against the entire Palestinian people.

Even on this issue, Donald Trump and his right wing friends are worse.

It did not have the right to kill 42,000 Palestinians, two-thirds of whom were children, women and the elderly, or injure over 100,000 people in Gaza. It did not have the right to destroy Gaza’s infrastructure and housing and health care systems. It did not have the right to bomb every one of Gaza’s 12 universities. It did not have the right to block humanitarian aid, causing massive malnutrition in children and, in fact, starvation.

That is why I am doing everything I can to block U.S. military aid and offensive weapons sales to Benjamin Netanyahu’s right-wing extremist government in Israel. I know that many voters share those feelings. And some of you are saying, “How can I vote for Kamala Harris if she is supporting this terrible war?” That is a very fair question.

Let me give you my best answer. And that is that even on this issue, Donald Trump and his right wing friends are worse. In the Senate and in Congress, the Republicans have worked overtime to block humanitarian aid to the starving children in Gaza. The president and vice president both support getting as much humanitarian aid into Gaza as soon as possible. Trump has said that Netanyahu is “doing a good job” and that Biden is holding him back. He has suggested that the Gaza Strip would make excellent beachfront property for development. It is no wonder Netanyahu prefers to have Donald Trump in office.

But even more importantly — and this I promise you — after Kamala wins, we will, together, do everything we can to change U.S. policy toward Netanyahu, including an immediate cease-fire, the return of all hostages, a surge of massive humanitarian aid, the stopping of settler attacks on the West Bank, and the rebuilding of Gaza for the Palestinian people.

Let me be clear. We will have, in my view, a much better chance of changing U.S. policy with Kamala Harris than with Donald Trump, who is extremely close to Netanyahu and sees him as a like-minded, right-wing extremist ally.

But let me also say this, and I deal with this every single day as a U.S. senator. As important as Gaza is, and as strongly as many of us feel about this, it is not the only issue at stake in this election.

If Trump wins, women in this country will suffer an enormous setback and lose the ability to control their own bodies. That is not acceptable.

Trump will demand even more tax breaks for the very richest people in our country, while cutting back on programs that working families desperately need.

If Trump wins, to be honest with you, the struggle against climate change is over. While virtually every scientist who has studied the issue understands that climate change is real and an existential threat to our country and the world, Trump believes it is a “hoax.” And if the United States, the largest economy in the world, stops transforming our energy system away from fossil fuel, every other country — China, Europe, all over the world — will do exactly the same thing. God only knows the kind of planet we will leave to our kids and future generations.

If Trump wins, at a time of massive income and wealth inequality, he will demand even more tax breaks for the very richest people in our country, while cutting back on programs that working families desperately need. The rich will only get richer, while the minimum wage will remain at $7.25 an hour, and millions of our fellow workers will continue to earn starvation wages.

Did you all see the recent Trump rally at Madison Square Garden? Well, I did, and what I can tell you is that as a nation, as all of you know, we have struggled for years against impossible odds to try to overcome all forms of bigotry — whether it is racism, whether it’s sexism, whether it’s homophobia, whether it’s xenophobia, you name it.

We have tried to fight against bigotry, but that is exactly what we saw on display at that unbelievable Trump rally. It was not a question of speakers getting up there and disagreeing with Kamala Harris on the issues. That wasn’t the issue at all. They were attacking her simply because she was a woman and a woman of color. Extreme, vulgar sexism and racism: Is that really the kind of America that we can allow?

So let me conclude by saying this. This is the most consequential election in our lifetimes. Many of you have differences of opinion with Kamala Harris on Gaza. So do I. But we cannot sit this election out. Trump has got to be defeated.
With less than a week until Election Day, Vice President Kamala Harris’ list of Republican backers continues to grow. On Wednesday, the vice president picked up another major endorsement: Arnold Schwarzenegger.

The actor and former Republican governor of California, who rarely offers political endorsements, shared his support for Harris on X. In a lengthy statement, Schwarzenegger, 77, said, “It is probably not a surprise that I hate politics more than ever,” and acknowledged that like most Americans he just wanted to “tune out” this election cycle.

“But I can’t,” he continued, before issuing a stark rebuke of his party’s presidential candidate, Donald Trump: “Because rejecting the results of an election is as un-American as it gets. To someone like me who talks to people all over the world and still knows America is the shining city on a hill, calling America a trash can for the world is so unpatriotic, it makes me furious.”

“A candidate who won’t respect your vote unless it is for him, a candidate who will send his followers to storm the Capitol while he watches with a Diet Coke, a candidate who has shown no ability to work to pass any policy besides a tax cut that helped his donors and other rich people like me but helped no one else, a candidate who thinks Americans who disagree with him are the bigger enemies than China, Russia, or North Korea — that won’t solve our problems,” Schwarzenegger wrote.

The former governor, who served from 2003 to 2011, said he will, “always be an American before I am a Republican.”

He urged voters to “close the door on this chapter of history” and said another Trump administration would, “just be four more years of bulls---- with no results that makes us angrier and angrier, more divided, and more hateful.”

Trump and Schwarzenegger, both celebrities who later turned to a career in politics, have sparred in the past. In 2017, after Schwarzenegger replaced Trump as the host of NBC's "Celebrity Apprentice," the then-president mocked the show's falling viewership, asking attendees at the National Prayer Breakfast to "pray" for the low ratings of his former TV series.

Schwarzenegger responded by suggesting the two switch jobs, "You can take over TV — because you’re such an expert in ratings —and I take over your job, then people can finally sleep comfortably again," he said in a video posted to Instagram.

The former governor previously endorsed former Ohio Gov. John Kasich in the 2016 GOP primary and urged him to run again to challenge Trump in 2020.

Schwarzenegger ended his post by acknowledging that while he doesn't agree with the Democratic ticket on policy, he believes they are still the best option for the future of America, “I want to move forward as a country, and even though I have plenty of disagreements with their platform, I think the only way to do that is with Harris and Walz,” he wrote. “Vote this week. Turn the page and put this junk behind us.”
Union workers could decide this election — and their unions know it

toggle caption Andrea Hsu/NPR

As November 5 draws closer, labor unions are blanketing swing states with tens of thousands of canvassers, deploying far more resources than in past elections in a bid to get the labor-friendly ticket of Kamala Harris and Tim Walz elected.

Some of the outreach is directly targeting union workers, active and retired, who along with their household members make up an estimated one in five voters in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania, according to the AFL-CIO.

The American Federation of Teachers has sent hundreds of its members from New York to Pennsylvania and from Illinois to Wisconsin to canvass "labor doors." The United Auto Workers has similarly deployed union members to fellow members' homes and work sites, in addition to an aggressive phone, text and mail campaign.

"When members hear directly from other members about what's at stake and which candidate will have their backs, we're able to break through," said UAW president Shawn Fain in a statement.

Sponsor Message

In Philadelphia and surrounding suburbs, the hospitality union UNITE HERE is going beyond union members, focusing primarily on Black and Latino voters in working-class communities, whom the union has identified as least likely to vote. The union says it's deploying some 2,000 canvassers across ten states in 2024, a five-fold increase from 2016.

"Some Latinos know nothing about Kamala," says Wernel Martinez, a hotel worker from Orlando who was hired by UNITE HERE to knock on doors in Pennsylvania.

toggle caption Andrea Hsu/NPR

Meanwhile, the Service Employees International Union, whose 2 million members include many health care workers, has set a goal of knocking on a million doors in the final four days of the election alone.



A study in contrasts

While both presidential candidates have been trying to woo the working class, their views on unions and labor law and regulations could hardly be farther apart. Harris has said she will strengthen unions, including by passing the PRO Act which would make it easier for workers to organize. As president, Donald Trump sought to weaken unions, going as far as stripping federal employee unions of power and voicing support for Right to Work laws, which allow workers to opt out of paying union dues.

While the Biden administration enacted rules to expand overtime to millions more workers, Trump in public remarks has admitted as a business owner, he hated paying overtime and would hire more people to avoid having to do so, a comment the AFL-CIO has highlighted as part of its voter outreach.

With such a contrast, it's no surprise that most major labor unions were quick to endorse Harris after she entered the race in July. However, there are some notable exceptions, including the Teamsters. Its leadership declined to make an endorsement following an internal survey that found members prefer Trump over Harris by a 2-to-1 margin, and meetings with both candidates that left union leaders unsatisfied. After the non-endorsement, many of the Teamsters' regional and local branches announced their own endorsements of Harris.



Sponsor Message

"People want to talk to somebody like them"

As part of the AFL-CIO's massive canvassing effort, Skylar Goodman, a political organizer with the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades, has been knocking on doors in every corner of Philadelphia since July, some days averaging five to seven miles on foot.

"People want to talk to somebody like them," says Goodman, who grew up in northeast Philadelphia, helping out her father, a tow truck driver, in the summers.

Earlier in the campaign, she'd strike up conversations on issues specific to unions — such as union jobs created under legislation championed by the Biden-Harris administration — and on broader issues like abortion.

She would zero in on Trump's record, pointing to his picks for the U.S. Supreme Court, which led to the overturning of Roe vs. Wade, and policies he enacted while in office that diminished the power of unions, many of which were rolled back by the Biden administration.

"It's like all this cleanup work was done and then a tornado is going to run through it all again" should Trump win, Goodman has warned.

But the persuasion phase of this campaign is largely over. Now, it's all about making sure people have a plan to vote.

Pennsylvania was decided by just 44,000 votes in 2016, and just over 80,000 in 2020, so buttoning up even a handful of votes matters. But even in blue Philadelphia, it's not the easiest thing.



People don't want to talk politics, but they'll whisper

On a recent weekday morning, a lot of people aren't home, and the few who come to the door don't want to share whom they're voting for.

"Some folks are more worried about how people in their life are going to react to their decision," says Goodman. "People will whisper it at me. They won't come out and have a conversation, but they'll whisper, 'I'm a Democrat. I'm voting for Harris.'"

toggle caption Andrea Hsu/NPR

That fear of being at odds with neighbors and family members is one reason Goodman has chosen to spend so much time talking with voters this election.

Sponsor Message

"We can disagree," she says. "We don't need to get angry with each other because we don't see things the same way. We all live different lives. Of course, we're going to see it different."



Union polling finds outreach is swaying voters

With less than a week to go until the election, unions say their collective campaigning is making a difference, even if the ground game remains challenging.

Last week, the UAW released a poll of 800 UAW members and households in key swing states. It found Harris holding a 29-point lead over Trump among those who reported hearing from the UAW about the election, compared to just a 6-point lead among those who said they'd not heard from their union.

"These numbers highlight the effectiveness of the union's aggressive strategy to inform members about the candidates' positions on key economic issues, including protecting overtime pay, overhauling harmful trade deals, preventing offshoring, expanding retirement security, and taking on corporate greed," the UAW said in a statement.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

When The Washington Post announced last week that its editorial board would not endorse Democrat Kamala Harris or Republican Donald Trump for president, the newspaper invited a flood of criticism — and more than 250,000 cancellations from apparently irate subscribers.

It was perhaps the most controversial non-endorsement of the 2024 election cycle. But it was far from the first.

Advertisement

For months now, notable politicians, celebrities and institutions have been saying that they won’t back anyone for president this year, at least not publicly. Since nobody seems to track non-endorsements, HuffPost has assembled this partial list of sideline sitters and their stated rationales. (For a list of actual endorsements, Wikipedia is a pretty good source.)

The Washington Post

Until this year, the Post’s editorial board had made an endorsement in every presidential election for three decades. The paper’s editorial page editor approved an endorsement of Harris that was being drafted earlier this month and reviewed by Post owner Jeff Bezos, NPR reported.

But CEO William Lewis announced Friday that the paper would be “returning to our roots of not endorsing presidential candidates,” citing a Post policy that was in place through the Richard Nixon era. He said the move was “a statement in support of our readers’ ability to make up their own minds on this, the most consequential of American decisions — whom to vote for as the next president.”

Bezos defended the move in a Monday op-ed, with the billionaire saying that “endorsements do nothing to tip the scales of an election” but “create a perception of bias.”

Advertisement

The reaction from high-profile journalists, including Post alums, has been brutal. Marty Baron, a former longtime executive editor, called the paper’s decision “cowardice, with democracy as its casualty.” He predicted that Trump would take the non-endorsement as “an invitation to further intimidate” Bezos, hinting that the billionaire may have feared retribution from a possible Trump administration if the Post endorsed Harris.

Billionaire Jeff Bezos defended The Washington Post's decision not to endorse a presidential candidate in 2024. via Associated Press

The Los Angeles Times

Before Bezos infuriated Post readers, Los Angeles Times owner Patrick Soon-Shiong prompted his own wave of cancellations by saying that Los Angeles’ paper of record would stay out of the presidential race.

Soon-Shiong said last week that although he did not green-light an endorsement, he had allowed his paper’s editorial board to “draft a factual analysis of all the POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE policies by EACH candidate.”

“Instead of adopting this path as suggested, the Editorial Board chose to remain silent and I accepted their decision,” he wrote on X.

Advertisement

The LA Times reported Monday that it had received around 1,000 emails and letters about the decision. “About 90% of them criticized the paper and its owner,” the story noted.

The International Brotherhood Of Teamsters

Prior to this year, the Teamsters had endorsed every Democratic presidential candidate since Bill Clinton, backing him in 1992 (and nobody in 1996). But union President Sean O’Brien announced last month that the group representing 1.3 million members would be sitting out the 2024 race, with member polling showing strong support for Trump among the rank and file.

The decision by the union’s executive board angered Harris supporters throughout organized labor, especially since Harris and other Democrats saved Teamster pension plans with no GOP support. “That alone should be enough to cement a commitment from the IBT,” Jim Hoffa, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters’ former longtime president, told HuffPost at the time.

Trump, who was hostile to unions throughout his 2017-2021 presidential term, has boasted about the non-endorsement. “Look, it was always automatic that Democrats get the Teamsters, and they said, ‘We won’t endorse the Democrats this year,’” the former president said at a New York campaign stop. “So that was an honor for me.”

Teamsters President Sean O'Brien said the union would not make a 2024 presidential endorsement, with member polling showing high support for Donald Trump. Tom Williams via Getty Images

Advertisement

Mike Pence

Former GOP Vice President Mike Pence’s decision this year not to endorse his old running mate didn’t come as a big surprise. After all, it was Trump who once whipped up a crowd of rioters chanting “hang Mike Pence” while mounting a failed insurrection at the U.S. Capitol. As Pence was being whisked away to safety on Jan. 6, 2021, Trump was calling him a coward for not overturning the 2020 presidential election results.

“I believe that anyone who puts themselves over the Constitution should never be president of the United States,” Pence said last year, months after Trump announced his 2024 candidacy.

But that doesn’t mean Pence has thrown his support behind the Democratic ticket. “I could never vote for Kamala Harris as president of the United States or Tim Walz as her running mate,” he said at a conservative forum in August. “Period. Paragraph.”

Mitt Romney

Soon-to-retire Utah Sen. Mitt Romney isn’t taking a side in the election, either. The former 2012 GOP presidential nominee has been knocking Trump for years, famously calling him a “phony” and a “fraud” in a withering takedown during the 2016 primary contest. He has publicly said more than once during the current campaign that the GOP standard-bearer won’t be getting his vote.

“I’ve made it very clear that I don’t want Donald Trump to be the next president of the United States,” he said at a recent University of Utah event.

Advertisement

Romney, however, has stopped short of endorsing Harris. The moderate Republican suggested that he wants to have a hand in some day rebuilding the GOP, and that throwing his weight behind Harris would make that more difficult. But he has also acknowledged that he’s well out of step with what the Republican Party has become.

“My wing of the party is like a chicken wing, all right?” Romney said in the spring. “It’s a little, tiny thing that doesn’t take the bird off the ground.”

Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah) has said he doesn't want Trump to become the next president, but has stopped short of endorsing Kamala Harris. Bill Clark via Getty Images

George W. Bush

Former Republican President George W. Bush hasn’t made an endorsement in this year’s race. His office has said Bush “retired from presidential politics years ago,” even though he publicly backed GOP candidates John McCain in 2008 and Romney in 2012.

Bush has bemoaned the Republican Party becoming “isolationist, protectionist and, to a certain extent, nativist” in the Trump era, but has held back from criticizing Trump by name.

Advertisement

Bush’s old running mate doesn’t share his sense of restraint. Former Vice President Dick Cheney has endorsed Harris and said Trump “can never be trusted with power again.”

“In our nation’s 248-year history, there has never been an individual who is a greater threat to our republic than Donald Trump,” Cheney said.

Bush’s daughter Barbara Pierce Bush has also endorsed Harris, telling People that she campaigned for the Democratic candidate in Pennsylvania over the weekend.

Dwayne ‘The Rock’ Johnson

Dwayne Johnson, the actor and wrestler also known as The Rock, publicly backed Harris and running mate Joe Biden during their 2020 run for the White House, but he has decided to stay quiet this time around.

“It’s between me and the ballot box,” Johnson told Fox News earlier this year.

Johnson has been talked about as a potential candidate for high office. Last year, he told comedian Trevor Noah that in 2022 he received a “visit from the parties” asking if he’d consider running for president.

Advertisement

Singer Chappell Roan said she'd vote for Harris but couldn't endorse either presidential ticket. Axelle/Bauer-Griffin via Getty Images

Chappell Roan

Credit to anyone who had this one on their endorsement-controversy bingo card.

Chappell Roan, the Missouri-born singer who rose to stardom in the past year, told the Guardian in September that she wouldn’t be endorsing anyone for president. “There are so many things that I would want to change [in the government]. So I don’t feel pressured to endorse someone,” she said. “There’s problems on both sides.”

Facing a backlash from progressive fans for her “both sides” remark, Roan later explained that she was voting for Harris but still wouldn’t endorse her for the presidency. “Obviously, fuck the policies of the right, but also fuck some of the policies on the left,” she said on TikTok. Roan has been an outspoken critic of U.S. support for Israel’s war in Gaza.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

PHOENIX (AP) — Inside a squat building ringed with a chainlink fence and concrete barriers in downtown Phoenix, election workers on Nov. 5 will begin a grindingly slow tally of every ballot cast in the vast expanse of stucco and saguaro that is Maricopa County, Arizona.

In what has become the nation’s ultimate swing county, the count here could determine whether Democrat Kamala Harris or Republican Donald Trump will be the next U.S. president. It also is likely to determine the winner of a closely watched race that could decide which party controls the U.S. Senate.

Advertisement

It is one of the most consequential battlegrounds in the country. That means voters, campaigns and people around the world sometimes must wait more than a week to learn who won the county, and with it, statewide races in the swing state of Arizona. This year, election officials warn it could take as long as 13 days to tabulate all of the ballots in Maricopa.

The drawn-out count has made the county a center of election conspiracy theories spawned by Trump. It’s also made Maricopa a key part of the former president’s campaign to install those who supported overturning the last election in 2020 into positions overseeing future ones.

But the reason it takes so long is simple. With its 4.5 million residents, Maricopa has a higher population than nearly half of the states in the country and is home to 60% of Arizona’s voters. Election workers must follow voting laws — which were approved by Republican-controlled legislatures — that slow the count. And it is one of the few counties in the U.S. that is so evenly divided politically that races are often close.

That’s made the county “the center of everything,” says Joe Garcia, a leader of the Latino activist group Chicanos Por La Causa, noting it is the population center of Arizona, its center of growth and home to the state capital.

Advertisement

“So the power structure, the money and the growth is all here in Maricopa County,” he said. “If you can win Maricopa County, you’re probably going to win the whole state of Arizona.”

Maricopa’s position isn’t just at the center of Arizona politics. The county has been a regular stop for presidential candidates as they look to clinch Arizona’s 11 electoral votes — including Trump and Harris and their campaigns this year — and it is a fulcrum on which nail-biter races that can determine control of the House of Representatives and U.S. Senate pivot.

The fast-growing county also has become home to a stew of key demographic groups in the battle for the White House: a growing Latino population, retirees, younger, newly arrived voters and a broad and deep conservative population wrestling with a pivotal splinter group — college-educated, more affluent Republicans who’ve soured on the party’s more pugnacious, and at times anti-democratic, turn under Trump.

It wasn’t always like that.

A ‘small town’ booms

Judy Schwiebert grew up in western Phoenix in the 1960s, when the now-booming city was what she describes as “a pretty small town” and the biggest event of the year was the three-day rodeo.

Everything stopped for the rodeo parade, as horse-drawn carriages, marching bands and dancers made their way through town. Schools closed for the full three days, recalls Schwiebert, who is now a Democratic state representative. In 1969, the county was still home to fewer than 1 million people, less than one-quarter the size it is today. With about 4.5 million residents, Maricopa County now has a population similar to the entire state of Kentucky.

Advertisement

“Over the years here I’ve seen it grow and grow,” Schweibert said.

The area became a magnet for conservatives like John Kavanagh, a retired New York Port Authority Police officer. After 20 years of policing, Kavanagh and his wife headed west, to Maricopa County. They went in 1993, because his wife couldn’t stand the cold in New York and Florida had too much humidity and was “overstocked with New Yorkers.”

Kavanagh was like a lot of other people who moved to Arizona in the 1990s — middle-class folks fleeing colder places and what they saw as economic and political dysfunction for a sunny, affordable, and what they perceived as a cleaner city.

Cactus plants dominate a hiking trail from The Buttes on Sept. 24, 2024, in Tempe, Ariz. AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin

“A lot of people came from those other cities, and they don’t want a repeat of what they left,” Kavanagh said.

In 1993, the county’s population was 2.3 million. Republicans dominated the state legislature and Maricopa County politics. As a young state of transplants, it was easier than in other places for new arrivals to enter Arizona politics. Kavanagh was elected to the state’s House of Representatives in 2006. Now he is serving his first term in the state Senate; the county’s population has nearly doubled since his arrival, and its politics have changed.

Advertisement

Arizona now has a Democratic governor, elected in 2022. Both its U.S. senators — Mark Kelly and Kyrsten Sinema — were elected as Democrats, though Sinema has since become an independent.

Kavanagh attributes the county’s leftward shift to a wide array of factors — from societal changes he sees as driven by the media and academia to people moving to Arizona for higher-paying jobs that require more education.

“Hopefully there’s a point where people look and see what the result will be if that trend continues,” Kavanagh said, predicting a strong November for his Republican Party. “Just look to L.A., look to New York, you know, look to Seattle. That’s where the continuing shift left will still occur. So let’s do a hard stop and maybe go a few steps back to the right.”

Clearly, many who made the move to Maricopa over the past few decades were not like Kavanagh. The county’s conservative, low-tax approach attracted businesses as well as individuals, and those companies then attracted workers who sometimes were different from the older transplants to Arizona.

Kevin Henderson moved to Maricopa in 2010 at age 23, after living in Chicago and Portland, Oregon. A Democrat who works in catering, he was pleasantly surprised by life in a then-red state and its residents’ live-and-let-live attitude.

Advertisement

“The people were very friendly,” said Henderson, now 37. “We are fortunate that, with such an eclectic group of people, we are very understanding and accepting of other people’s views.”

At the same time that people like Henderson came from other places inside the United States, increased migration to Arizona from Mexico also prompted political change.

In the 1990s, President Bill Clinton’s administration strengthened California’s border, pushing illegal migration to Arizona, which already had a robust Hispanic population. Immigration quickly became a political flashpoint, leading many in the growing Latino population living in Maricopa legally to feel that Republicans were demonizing them.

The biggest shift came in 2010, when Arizona’s Republican-controlled legislature passed a law allowing local police to stop people they suspected of being in the country illegally. The U.S. Supreme Court overturned the law, but it energized the state’s Latinos to organize against Republicans.

The law, which opponents dubbed “Show Me Your Papers,” was the harshest anti-immigrant law in the nation, and it changed Arizona politics, Latino activist Garcia said. It led to boycotts and protests. Nationally and internationally, people knew about Republican Sheriff Joe Arpaio — who pushed for the law — and his crime sweeps aimed at immigrants.

Advertisement

”That galvanized the Latino community like nothing ever had ever done before. It galvanized the Latino community more than all the voter groups put together,” Garcia said. “It was a curse, but it was a silver lining. It was a blessing because Latinos figured out that, you know what? If we’re not involved politically, then we lose.”

Republicans swept the state in 2010 and their hammerlock on Maricopa County seemed likely to continue even amid growing Latino dissatisfaction.

But that would change, as a new GOP leader emerged.

Republicans reconsider

The first rumblings that Maricopa County could swing against the long-dominant Republican Party came in 2016.

Even as Trump was winning the county and Arizona, Republican Sheriff Arpaio lost his bid for a seventh term. Arpaio was something of a precursor to Trump, known for his hunger for media attention and jousting with journalists, a hardline stance on immigration and a willingness to go after his critics — he even arrested a Republican county supervisor who criticized him. Trump ultimately pardoned Arpaio after the sheriff was convicted of contempt of court for refusing to obey an injunction against racial profiling of Latinos.

Gordon Keig voted against Arpaio. A lifelong Republican, Keig was increasingly uneasy with his party’s growing hostility to immigration and SB 1070, the controversial 2010 law. Though he’s a developer and fan of low taxes, Keig was frustrated at how the GOP state legislature kept cutting Arizona’s already-low taxes, jeopardizing education funding.

Advertisement

Keig couldn’t bring himself to vote for Trump or his 2016 rival, Hillary Clinton. And once Trump came into office and began what Keig saw as his erratic, feud-driven approach to governing — including fighting with Arizona’s popular senior Republican Sen. John McCain, whose grandchildren Keig’s own daughters knew — Keig couldn’t take it anymore. He switched his registration to the Democratic Party.

Supporters of President Donald Trump rally outside the Maricopa County Recorder's Office, Nov. 6, 2020, in Phoenix. AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin, File

He did get some pushback. Keig said some friends questioned how he could become a Democrat, but others understood.

“I just felt like the Republican values weren’t, weren’t there for me anymore,” he said. “But I think, you know, even some of my close friends that are still very, you know, active Republican Party members, understand and accept because they, I think they may agree with me that (what) buoyed a lot of the party has gone in a completely different direction.”

In 2020, Keig voted for Democrat Joe Biden. The change by voters like him is visible by comparing Maricopa’s votes in the 2012 presidential election with 2020. A crescent of more affluent neighborhoods ringing central Phoenix from the north to the southeastern edge, where a new Intel chip plant has attracted high-tech workers, switched from Republican to Democratic. Local political operatives dubbed the area “the flip zone.”

Advertisement

The flip zone largely tracks where Maricopa’s more educated residents have clustered. Once less educated than the national average, the county now boasts a slightly higher share of adults with four-year-college degrees than the national average — a key indicator of voting Democratic in the age of Trump.

As Maricopa County’s political leaning changed, so did the state’s. In every presidential election since 2000, the Republican had won both the county and the state, though Trump’s 2016 margin over Hillary Clinton was smaller than previous GOP victories. But in 2020, Democrat Biden won the county, and Arizona.

Trump falsely claimed he won Arizona after his 2020 loss, and he and his allies assailed anyone who argued otherwise.

Watching the reaction of some local Republicans after Biden won the state made Keig even more comfortable with his change.

When the Republican speaker of the Arizona House refused to award the state’s electors to Trump, the former president’s backers primaried him and forced him out of office. When Maricopa County’s Republican supervisors refused Trump’s demands to question the vote tally, they, too, were targeted. Threats against Maricopa County Supervisor Bill Gates got so bad he fled his house.

Advertisement

“These are people I really, really admired,” Keig said. “And they were just run through the mud.”

Denials and conspiracies

Trump’s lie that he won Arizona made Maricopa County one of the nation’s hotbeds of election denial and conspiracy theories.

After the 2020 election, Trump supporters turned up outside the county elections office, some armed and many waving Trump and American flags, for a “Stop the Steal” rally. His then-attorney, Rudy Giuliani, held hearings at a Phoenix hotel.

The Republican-controlled state Senate launched an error-riddled review of Maricopa’s handling of the 2020 election that included inspecting ballots for signs of fibers showing they were secretly made in China. The county became something of a tourist attraction for election deniers who came from other states to watch the show.

County Recorder Stephen Richer, a Republican who defended the accuracy of the county’s election results, was singled out for criticism by Trump himself, and Richer and his family faced threats.

In 2022, Republicans who sided with Trump against Richer and the county supervisors ran for top statewide offices, and all lost. The losing candidate for governor, Kari Lake, made so many claims about the election being stolen and allegations against Richer that he sued his fellow Republican for libel.

Advertisement

Lake is running for Senate this year against Democratic Rep. Ruben Gallego.

Richer says the reason some Republicans remain skeptical of the way elections work in the county isn’t because there’s anything especially complicated or unusual in how it counts votes. It’s because Maricopa — located in a onetime reliably red state where Biden in 2020 defeated Trump by a margin of about 11,000 votes — may be the best place to undermine confidence in national elections.

“I don’t think it’s the complexity of the process. Our process looks pretty similar to most Western states,” Richer said. “I think it is that this is where the action is.”

Indeed, Trump, in a campaign appearance in the county in 2023 called the county’s Board of Supervisors, which shares election duties with the Recorder, the most important in the country.

The four Republicans on the board also rebuffed Trump’s pleas to overturn the election in 2020. Two are retiring after threats, and a Trump ally won the GOP primary to replace one of them. A third was ousted in a primary by another Trump supporter.

In July, Richer lost his Republican primary. The winner, state Rep. Justin Heap, has questioned the ballot-counting process.

Advertisement

Part of what fuels the conspiracy theories is sheer disbelief that Maricopa, a national magnet for conservatives for decades, could go Democratic.

Michelle Ugenti-Rita is an Arizona native who sought a seat on the county Board of Supervisors but lost in a GOP primary in July. Speaking to a group of Republicans gathered in Scottsdale to watch the debate between Trump and Biden earlier this year, she denied the shift is due to actual votes.

“I am tired of the media colluding with the Board of Supervisors and gaslighting us to make us feel like we’re liberal, like we’re California,” Ugenti-Rita told the crowd.

Still, many in Maricopa are keenly aware they’re living on a partisan razor’s edge, closely balanced between the two sides. Take Sandra Heyn, an 80-year-old retired teacher from California who came to the county three years ago to be closer to one of her grown sons.

She’s a Republican and devout Lutheran who’s uneasy about Trump, even though she voted for him in 2020. But she’s bemused at how, when she meets people just in line at the supermarket, the conversation quickly turns to politics.

Advertisement

“I’ve had people, some people tell me, ‘Oh, you’re from California. We don’t want anybody liberal coming here.’ And then I’ve had other people say ... ‘If you’re not liberal, keep moving.’”

Why a complete count takes time

The conspiracists have seized on how Maricopa reports its ballot counts in one large burst after Election Day and then in dribs and drabs for more than another week, when it finally becomes clear who won. There are three main reasons for this — Maricopa’s size, the closeness of races in the county and Arizona’s voting laws, which were written and approved by Republicans.

Maricopa is the second-largest election jurisdiction in the nation. Only reliably Democratic Los Angeles County is larger.

Maricopa reports its results far faster than Los Angeles, but it takes longer to find out who won Maricopa, which creates a false impression of disorder in the vote count there.

The reason Maricopa takes longer is because Maricopa — and Arizona overall — is so evenly divided nowadays that a few thousand votes make the difference. So news organizations have to wait until virtually the last ballot is counted before declaring a winner.

Advertisement

In 2022, a Democrat won the state attorney general’s race by 280 votes. In less competitive places, from Florida to California, the victor is usually clear within minutes of polls closing because the tens of thousands of outstanding ballots wouldn’t be enough to close the gap.

This election, voters are casting an extra-long two-page ballot that takes longer to tabulate, so it could take up to 13 days before they finish counting, Deputy Elections Director Jennifer Liewer said. The timeline is similar to the number of days it has taken in recent elections to complete the count. Associated Press research found it took 13 days for Maricopa County to finish counting in the 2018 general election, 11 days in 2020 and 13 days in the 2022 midterms.

Arizona’s mail voting law also drags out the count. It allows voters to return mail ballots by the close of polls on Election Day. In 2022, some 293,000 voters — representing one-fifth the total vote in Maricopa — dropped off their mail ballots on Election Day.

Mail ballots take longer to count because, before they can be tallied, the envelopes must be scanned, the ballots sorted and the voters’ signatures inspected to ensure they’re legitimate. Some states like Florida require all mail ballots to be in before Election Day so this process is over when the polls close. Because of Arizona law, when Maricopa’s polls close it’s just beginning.

Extending the count even longer is a provision in Arizona law that allows voters to “cure” their ballots up to five days after Election Day. That means if the election office thinks the signature on the ballot or some other technical detail is wrong, the voter has five more days to come in and fix it so the ballot counts.

Advertisement

Usually the number of cured ballots is relatively small, but in elections where every vote is essential to determining the winner, the curing process drags the suspense out even more.

Richer noted that, while these processes may sound overly complex to some in the U.S., they’re things that Western states like Arizona have been doing for a century or more. Mail voting dates back to the 19th century in the region.

“We vote differently than most of the Eastern United States does,” Richer said.

___
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WASHINGTON — Standing at a podium at the same park where former President Donald Trump whipped up the mob that would attack the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, Vice President Kamala Harris promised to protect democracy not just for its own sake, but so Americans can afford good lives and have the freedom to control their own bodies.

Amid a heated debate among Democrats over just how much Harris should play to fears about Trump’s authoritarian instincts, Harris found a way, in a speech billed as her closing argument a week before Election Day, to depict Trump’s focus on personal grievances and retribution as both a threat to the country’s future and an obstacle to the actual work of serving the public.

Advertisement

“In less than 90 days, either Donald Trump or I will be in the Oval Office,” Harris told a crowd that her campaign estimated was 75,000 strong. “On Day 1, if elected, Donald Trump would walk into that office with an enemies list. When elected, I will walk in, with a to-do list full of priorities on what I will get done for the American people. And I will work with everyone — Democrats, Republicans and independents — to help Americans who are working hard and still struggling to get ahead.”

Harris conjured the image of her single mother sitting at their yellow Formica table with a cup of tea as she went through the bills. It’s an experience Harris shares with many other Americans, and one she said would inform her priorities in office.

“Donald Trump’s answer to you is the same as before: another trillion dollars in tax cuts for billionaires and big corporations,” Harris said. “And this time, he will pay for it with a 20% national sales tax on everything you buy that is imported, clothes, food, toys, cell phones: a Trump sales tax that would cost the average family nearly $4,000 a year.”

Trump would also add to families’ health care costs by repealing the Affordable Care Act, she continued, before setting up one of her stump speech’s trademark lines: “We are not going back,” she said, prompting the crowd to break out in chants of “not going back.”

Advertisement

“America, we know what Donald Trump has in mind: More chaos, more division, and policies that help those at the very top and hurt everyone else. I offer a different path. And I ask for your vote.” - Vice President Kamala Harris

“Donald Trump will deliver tax cuts to his billionaire donors,” Harris added. “I will deliver tax cuts to working people and the middle class. I will make sure you have a chance to not just get by but get ahead, because I believe in honoring the dignity of work.”

Harris then went through a detailed list of her economic policy priorities: building millions of new homes; providing $25,000 in aid for first-time home buyers; creating a $6,000 child tax credit for the parents of newborns; and expanding Medicare to cover long-term care for seniors.

The setting and scenery of Harris’ speech aimed to give her the patriotic high ground over Trump while helping voters picture her as the commander-in-chief. Harris spoke on a large stage on the south side of the White House, with its lit portico visible directly behind her. Two large signs that bore the word “FREEDOM” stood at either side. The sea of people listening to her remarks stretched all the way down to the National Monument, which was surrounded by thousands of Harris supporters and some protesters of Israel’s war in Gaza.

To drive the point home, Harris portrayed herself and her agenda truer heirs to the American Revolution than Trump.

Advertisement

“Nearly 250 years ago, America was born when we wrested freedom from a petty tyrant,” Harris said. “Across the generations, Americans have preserved that freedom, expanded it, and in so doing, proved to the world that a government of, by, and for the people is strong and can endure.”

A lit up White House was visible behind Harris as she addressed the massive crowd. The setting aimed to help people envision her as president and remind them of Trump's misdeeds. Kent Nishimura/Getty Images

“They did not struggle, sacrifice, and lay down their lives, only to see us cede our fundamental freedoms, only to see us submit to the will of another petty tyrant,” she added. “The United States of America is not a vessel for the schemes of wannabe dictators. The United States of America is the greatest idea humanity ever devised.”

Throughout her remarks, Harris emphasized her interest in soliciting ideas from Republicans and other people with whom she disagrees. She has already promised to appoint a Republican to her cabinet, something Biden did not do.

“America, we know what Donald Trump has in mind: more chaos, more division and policies that help those at the very top and hurt everyone else. I offer a different path. And I ask for your vote,” she said in her concluding pitch. “And here is my pledge to you: I pledge to seek common ground and common sense solutions to make your lives better.”

Advertisement

Trump held a rally in Allentown, Pennsylvania, on Tuesday evening at roughly the same time as Harris’ speech.

Trump has elicited criticism for comments made by the stand-up comic Tony Hinchcliffe at his Sunday rally in Madison Square Garden. Hinchcliffe called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage in the middle of the ocean,” prompting a rare disavowal from the Trump campaign.

Allentown is a majority-Latino city with a large Puerto Rican community. A small group of protesters amassed outside of the building where Trump spoke on Tuesday, among them people displaying Puerto Rican flags.

The Trump campaign responded to Harris’ speech by reiterating its argument that she has already had the chance to prove her governing abilities and must now answer for the Biden administration’s record.

“Kamala’s first day in office was over 1,300 days ago, and she has spent the past four years working hand-in-hand with Joe Biden to destroy our country — but now, she is lying about her record because she has zero policy solutions to offer,” Trump campaign spokesperson Karoline Leavitt said in a statement. “As for President Trump, his closing argument to the American people is simple: Kamala broke it; he will fix it.”

Advertisement

In keeping with the spirit of the evening at Harris’s speech on the Ellipse, several rally attendees spoke about the stakes of the race for the country ― and their concerns about a Trump victory.

Olivia Troye, a former aide to ex-Vice President Mike Pence who has spoken out against Trump, told HuffPost she “absolutely” feared retribution if he returns to the White House next year.

“It is a very surreal, emotional moment one week out,” Troye, who served as a homeland security advisor in the Trump administration, said Tuesday. “When I’m looking at the election being so close, I’m wondering what the day after looks like and I’m having the tough conversations with my family,” she added. “My friends are worried, my neighbors are worried. They’re wondering what they can do. It’s definitely more real now.”

Troye is a former career intelligence professional who also served under President George W. Bush. In August, she spoke at the Democratic National Convention and warned that Trump is unfit for office.

“I’m seeing a lot of movement on the ground and a lot of positive energy and support for Kamala Harris, especially from Republicans and independents,” she said Tuesday, adding that she hoped there is “a silent majority” in support for electing Harris.

Advertisement

“If she doesn’t win I don’t know that I would recognize the country anymore.” - Erin Denney, Maryland voter

Earlier Tuesday, U.S. Capitol Police Officer Harry Dunn, who was on duty during the Jan. 6 attack, reflected on the symbolism of Harris’ speech at the Ellipse.

“Just think of the last presidential address here,” he told HuffPost. “I’m just really glad that she’s doing it here, kind of like reclaiming it as, ‘Hey, what happened then? We don’t accept it, we don’t tolerate, and we’re not going back to that.’”

Dunn endured racist abuse while protecting the Capitol from a mob of Trump supporters and has been outspoken about Trump’s culpability in the riot and efforts to whitewash the events of that day.

Other Harris supporters at the rally were optimistic about her chances, but still worried about the country and a possible second Trump term.

Advertisement

“If she doesn’t win I don’t know that I would recognize the country anymore,” said Erin Denney, a 42-year-old from Maryland. “We will lose a lot of our rights. Even the people who don’t believe will lose their rights will lose their rights.”

Denney also likes that Harris has never referred to “anyone who lives in the country as an enemy of the country.”

Francise Dyson, a 58-year-old D.C. native, said it was important to be at the Ellipse, “in contrast to the people who were here on Jan. 6.”

She added of the vibe of the rally, “This is America right here. It’s such a huge diversity, and everybody is here in love. It’s a joyful place.”

William Thayer, a 69-year-old from Maryland, agreed. “It really is America. This is what Donald Trump doesn’t like, what we have here. Because he didn’t grow up with it.”
is a senior correspondent on the Culture team for Vox, where since 2016 she has covered books, publishing, gender, celebrity analysis, and theater.

In 2016, when Donald Trump was first elected president, today’s 18-year-olds were only 10. So when footage leaked of Trump bragging about sexually assaulting women in that year’s truly horrifying October surprise, they didn’t fully understand what the tape meant or know what to make of it, if they were even aware of it at all.

Now, Gen Z’s new voters are rediscovering the infamous Access Hollywood tape, with some hearing it in full for the first time. Young TikTokers are making videos reacting with somber faces to the audio of Trump’s tape, grimacing as he gets to the infamous line, “Grab ’em by the pussy.” The most popular one has nearly 1 million views.

“This is actually soooo crazyyy,” a commenter marvles on one such video. Another adds, “why is this not blown up more?!” Another: “I can’t even process this.” Dozens and dozens of them say: “Boost.” You can tell that the legions of new viewers and commenters think the tape is important and they want more people to see it, because it’s one of those Trump things the rest of us have mostly stopped talking about.

Today, Explained Understand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

It’s become a truism among adults — particularly older, embittered Democrats — who have lived through the Trump era that “lol nothing matters.” No matter how depraved Trump’s words and actions are, it seems nothing will stop his relentless, exhausting political momentum.

That is the power of his countless scandals: So many of them are so far beyond where we naively thought the line of acceptable behavior was that it’s easy to become numb. It’s easy to allow yourself to forget Trump’s multitude of sins.

Watching Gen Z absorb this particular scandal anew for the first time, though, is a reminder that Trump’s misdeeds — particularly his decades of brazen, unapologetic sexual misconduct — still can and should shock. It’s worth remembering the specifics before we enter the voting booth in 2024, in an election that will almost certainly see millions of people voting for a known sexual abuser, and may well end with him back in the White House.

So let’s not forget.

Let’s not forget that Trump bragged on a hot mic about sexually assaulting women, boasting, “And when you’re a star, they let you do it. You can do anything. Grab ‘em by the pussy. You can do anything.”

Let’s not forget that Trump was found civilly liable just last year of sexually assaulting journalist E. Jean Carroll, with a jury concluding that a preponderance of evidence shows that he violently and nonconsensually forced himself on her.

Let’s not forget that Trump has been accused of sexual assault by at least 21 other women.

Let’s not forget that one of Trump’s accusers was his ex-wife Ivana, who said under oath that he violently and vindictively raped her. (She later said she didn’t want her words to be taken in “a literal or criminal sense.”)

Let’s not forget that Trump put a judge on the Supreme Court who had been accused of sexual assault by multiple women.

Let’s not forget that Trump selected that justice and two others for the Court with the express purpose of demolishing a woman’s right to reproductive freedom. Let’s not forget that his Supreme Court did what it was designed to do and got rid of abortion’s legal protections.

Let’s not forget that after the Court demolished this right, Trump bragged that their decision was “only made possible because I delivered everything as promised, including nominating and getting three highly respected and strong Constitutionalists confirmed to the United States Supreme Court. It was my great honor to do so!”

That’s just some of what Trump’s done to women. There’s much more to remember.

One of the values of a fresh generation of political actors coming of age is that they can help the rest of us see tired old atrocities clearly and cleanly once again. The moral clarity of youth can be powerful; when the country is on the verge of reelecting a sexual offender, it becomes invaluable.

Maybe lol nothing matters. But let’s at least not forget any of it.
Ahead of Election Day 2020, Donald Trump was well aware of the fact that he might lose. In fact, for much of the year, practically all of the available evidence suggested that the Republican incumbent president was headed for a likely defeat.

And so, Trump started laying the groundwork long before voters headed to the polls. He routinely told the public that he believed his own country’s electoral system was “rigged,” and his political foes would “cheat.” Asked whether he would accept the results of the election, the Republican routinely responded that it would depend on the degree to which he was satisfied with the outcome.

When Trump did, in fact, lose, he took advantage of the work he’d already done — telling his base that Democrats had cheated, just as he’d said for months. The then-president was, of course, brazenly lying, but he nevertheless used his campaign of deceptions to try to overturn the results, culminating in Trump’s decision to deploy a violent mob to attack the U.S. Capitol, as part of an insurrectionist attack on our democracy.

Four years later, the second verse sounds an awful lot like the first. NBC News reported:

As Election Day approaches, former President Donald Trump has increasingly been warning that if he loses, it will be because of cheating. “They’re going to cheat. They cheat. That’s all they want to do is cheat,” Trump said of Democrats during a rally this month in Juneau, Wisconsin. “It’s the only way they’re going to win.”

The NBC News report added that, according to a network analysis, the GOP candidate “mentioned Democrats’ likelihood of cheating in the November election at 14 of his last 20 rallies. By comparison, over the summer, Trump referred to Democrats trying to cheat in the 2024 race just five times in 20 rally speeches.”

But as was the case four years ago, telling the public that his opponents will cheat was the first step. The second involves telling voters that his opponents are cheating — even if there’s no credible evidence to bolster the claims.

On Monday night, for example, the former president used his social media platform to push a series of claims related to Pennsylvania’s system. “WHAT IS GOING ON IN PENNSYLVANIA???” Trump wrote in his usual understated style. “Law Enforcement must do their job, immediately!!! WOW!!!”

The next morning, the GOP candidate held a pseudo news conference in which he simply asserted as fact that “some serious things have been caught” in Pennsylvania. About an hour later, he published a related item online, suggesting that law enforcement in the state is “looking at ... VOTER FRAUD!”

That evening, Trump held another event in the Keystone State, telling supporters that Democrats “have already started cheating.”

Someone listening to all of this might start to wonder if the voting system in the commonwealth is somehow unraveling. In reality, it is not. The New York Times reported that officials in Pennsylvania have identified some suspicious voter registration forms, “but contrary to Mr. Trump’s incendiary claim that fake ballots had been cast, there were no reports of actual ballots being among the two batches of documents.”

The article added that on the ground in Pennsylvania, “away from the high-strung channels of social media, law enforcement was already doing its job.”

I won’t pretend to know whether Trump actually believes his own rhetoric, but what the public should keep in mind is the familiarity of the circumstances. As regular readers know, it’s a process I like to call pre-emptive delegitimization.

Fearing possible legal defeats, Trump has repeatedly tried to delegitimize the justice system to invalidate potential adverse outcomes. Fearing possible debate defeats, he did the same thing, making pre-emptive excuses for possible failure ahead of his debate with President Joe Biden, and then doing it again ahead of his debate with Vice President Kamala Harris.

And fearing possible election defeats, the Republican has consistently taken steps to delegitimize the process to explain away potential losses. Trump approaches effectively every challenge with the same thought: “If I fail, it can’t be my fault.”

It’s something to keep in mind as he continues to target the integrity of the U.S. voting system.
After months of scuttlebutt about Elon Musk possibly working with Donald Trump after the election, the former president confirmed the chatter in early September. The conspiratorial billionaire, the Republican declared, would help lead a “government efficiency commission” that would, among other things, cut federal spending.

The panel, the GOP candidate boasted, would save taxpayers “trillions of dollars.”

Nearly two months later, Trump is still talking about this as if it were a serious idea. The Washington Post reported:

Donald Trump told Fox News’s Sean Hannity on Tuesday that billionaire Elon Musk, a prominent ally and megadonor to Trump, is a ‘great cost cutter’ who could help the federal government dramatically reduce spending. ‘Nobody’s going to feel it,’ Trump claimed, noting that Musk has given a goal of cutting $2 trillion from the budget.

At this point, we could talk at length about the fact that Musk has no meaningful experience in auditing. We could also note that the billionaire has no background in federal budgeting or appropriations (except for receiving taxpayer money to give one of his businesses a boost).

We could even spend some time asking why, if there’s such vast waste and abuse in government spending, Trump, during his four years in the White House, made no meaningful effort to address the issue. (Somehow, we’re also supposed to believe that Musk will succeed where GOP-led congressional budget committees failed.)

But for now, let’s instead focus on the idea that Americans wouldn’t even notice after Musk and Trump cut $2 trillion from the budget.

The world’s wealthiest man has said largely the opposite. In fact, as my MSNBC colleague Ja’han Jones noted, Musk appears to have conceded that the budget cuts would impose real “hardship” on much of the country.

But his preferred candidate apparently doesn’t see it that way. “Nobody’s going to feel it,” Trump told Hannity.

I’m mindful of the fact that the former president has never familiarized himself with the basics of federal budgetary policy, and he’s never even been especially good at arithmetic, but it’s worth reviewing some easy-to-understand details. The Washington Post had a good report on this, published before Trump sat down with Hannity:

In the 2024 fiscal year, the U.S. government spent more than $6.75 trillion, according to the Treasury Department. For Musk to reach his target, particularly in a single year, his review would need to find a way to eliminate about one-third of all federal spending.

The article added that slashing the budget that steeply would require “decimating an array of government services, including food, health care and housing aid — and it could erode funding for programs that lawmakers in both parties say they want to protect, from defense to Social Security.”

Trump has been categorical in saying that he wouldn’t touch social insurance programs such as Medicare and Social Security, while also vowing not to cut spending on national defense or veterans’ benefits.

If one is inclined to believe those assurances, the result is unambiguous: Take all of the money the federal government spends, subtract Social Security, Medicare, the military, veterans’ benefits and interest on the national debt, and you’re left with roughly $2 trillion.

According to Trump, Musk intends to cut ... roughly $2 trillion.

As Kevin Drum summarized, “So Elon is claiming we should literally zero out the entire rest of the federal budget. Everything. The FBI, national parks, food stamps, Medicaid, education, NASA, the EPA, farm support, the NIH, all federal R&D grants, embassies worldwide, the FAA, the Department of Justice, the VA, the weather service, the border patrol, etc. etc. Everything.”

If Trump genuinely believes this could happen and no one would “feel it,” he shouldn’t even be a candidate for public office.
On a sunny Saturday afternoon in October, Ana Perez stood under a tree dripping Spanish moss on the University of Florida campus and taught eight of her peers how to talk about abortion. The group listened quietly as Perez presented a set of best practices for discussing Florida’s current six-week abortion ban, and the plan to change it.

“We always say near-total ban or extreme ban, never the actual week mark,” Perez said of the abortion law. That’s because most voters don’t understand that six weeks into pregnancy is just two weeks after a missed period, before many people know they’re pregnant.

Talking about a specific number of weeks “will get you into the territory of ‘Oh, what amount of weeks is OK vs. not?’ Like a negotiation,” Perez continued. “That’s just a road you don’t want to go down.”

Perez, a 19-year-old sophomore from Boca Raton, is a paid organizer with Floridians Protecting Freedom, the group behind a ballot initiative to end the abortion restriction. If it passes this November, Amendment 4 would enshrine in the Florida Constitution the right to an abortion until fetal viability, with exceptions beyond that point for the patient’s health—standards that replicate the protections all Americans had under Roe v. Wade.

Since the beginning of August, Perez has been educating her fellow students about the amendment and recruiting volunteers on campus, part of an outreach effort that includes a dozen student organizers at 10 universities across the state. FPF is spending more than $1 million on college programs alone, going all in on the bet that young voters—strongly pro-choice, but with a lot of room for improvement in Election Day turnout—can swing the election in favor of abortion rights if they know that the issue is on the ballot.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Perez had recruited her eight volunteers that Saturday by individually texting every single person on the membership rolls of the College Democrats and a campus pro-choice group. Several had never engaged in any political activity before. The day was hot, the humidity had hit an ungodly 90 percent, and these eight college students were preparing to ask dozens of total strangers—in Florida!— their opinions on one of the most contentious issues in American politics.

“I will warn you guys, it’s a game day. I usually get more opposition on game days,” Perez said. The football game wouldn’t start for another seven hours, but the quads and side streets were already packed with the elaborate tailgating setups of students and alumni. Perez revved up the canvassers with a pep talk—“We can do hard things!”—and sent them off in pairs.

Advertisement

Perez feels as if she’s been building toward this campaign for almost half her life. The daughter of a woman she calls a “liberal lion,” she has a vivid memory of waking up the morning after the 2016 election and, at 11 years old, immediately checking the CNN homepage. “It’s just so visceral to me,” she said. “Seeing that big red Trump check mark, I just started crying. I was devastated.” Perez was in high school when Roe v. Wade was overturned. By the time she got to UF in 2023, the state had passed the six-week abortion ban, and FPF was already collecting the signatures it needed to get Amendment 4 on the ballot. As soon as she turned 18, Perez added her name to the petition—the first one she’d ever signed.

Advertisement

Advertisement

This school year, Perez said, the campaign has become her whole life. She even dyed the lower half of her long brown hair purple, the main color of the campaign’s branding. It was a symbolic choice for Floridians Protecting Freedom, representing the red and blue parts of the state coming together in a shared mission. “I’ve talked to people that were like, ‘OK, yeah, Amendment 4, that makes sense. But I’m also voting Trump 2024,’ ” Perez said. She has no love for Gov. Ron DeSantis or the other Republicans who criminalized abortion in her state—but she has still spent her semester making common cause with some of their supporters.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

In fact, the bulk of the campaign’s messaging is designed to appeal to exactly those voters. “That’s why the amendment is named what it is,” Perez pointed out. “ ‘Amendment to Limit Government Interference With Abortion.’ ”

By any estimation, the campaign for Amendment 4 is a long shot. Even though abortion rights have won every time they’ve been put to a popular vote since the overturning of Roe, including in right-leaning Ohio and Kansas, those ballot initiatives needed just a simple majority to pass. In Florida, a constitutional amendment needs 60 percent of the vote—a threshold abortion-rights advocates have hit only in the likes of California and Vermont.

And Florida has only gotten redder in recent years. Registered Republicans first outnumbered Democrats in the state in 2021; now they lead by more than 1 million voters. DeSantis was reelected by a margin of almost 20 points in 2022. To get to 60 percent, proponents of Amendment 4 will have to entice a sizable number of Republicans—and supporters of DeSantis, a top proponent of the abortion ban—to vote for it.

Advertisement

For Lauren Brenzel, the campaign director of Floridians Protecting Freedom, there’s good reason to believe they can pull it off. “Normal people, everyday people, just think of this as a personal decision. This idea that the government is so focused on this, that politicians are so focused on this, is foreign to people,” she said. In polling over the past two years, the campaign has seen support for legal abortion rise, and not just among Democrats. Fifty-two percent of Republicans oppose the current abortion ban, and about 15 percent of the signatures on petitions to get Amendment 4 on the ballot come from registered Republicans.

Advertisement

Advertisement

But Florida polls on the amendment have been all over the place. A few have shown the amendment clearing the 60 percent mark, and several have recorded support in the high 50s. A recent survey from the New York Times and Siena College—the top-rated pollster on FiveThirtyEight—found that just 46 percent of likely voters supported the amendment, while 38 percent were ready to vote against it. That means the proportion of undecided voters is in the double digits.

Advertisement

In other words, the race is still anyone’s game—and the result will depend heavily on who turns out to vote.

Young voters are highly supportive of abortion rights, and they care a lot about the issue. An April Pew survey found that three-quarters of adults under 30 believe that abortion should be legal in all or most cases. According to AP VoteCast, among Floridians under 30 who voted in the 2022 midterm elections, 3 in 10 said the overturning of Roe v. Wade was the single most important factor in their vote, compared with about 2 in 10 older voters.

There’s a term campaigns use for a category of voters that are friendly to one’s candidate or cause but don’t consistently vote: turnout universe. They’re on your side … if they make it to the polls. These people have to be targeted with more voting information and reminders, rather than persuasive messaging—and FPF knows exactly who they are. “Nearly our entire turnout universe are voters in the ages of 18 to 35,” said Gabriel Gomez, the campaign’s youth programs manager. “And we know that you can’t speak to youth in the same way that you speak to older, traditionally more engaged voters.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Young people are more likely to listen to their peers, so FPF has been hiring them. Paid campus fellows like Perez are a major pillar of the campaign’s strategy to turn out the youth vote. When students moved into their dorms this semester, campaign representatives were there to greet them and recruit them to the cause. In the weeks since, FPF has hosted five student-organizing boot camps, and volunteers have worked 2,000 shifts across 22 campuses, doing things like tabling, door knocking, and putting on the kinds of crowd-canvassing sessions Perez led at the UF tailgate.

Advertisement

That afternoon, I tagged along with Kaylee Aleu, 19, and Chloe Wangensteen, 21, as they moseyed around a quad filled with students and alumni who had set up camp before the game. They eyed a compound with nine pop-up tents, a DJ booth, multiple television screens, a step-and-repeat, a ping-pong table, and a 7-foot-tall inflatable alligator. “I’m intimidated by interrupting people’s fun,” Aleu said.

Advertisement

Still, she pressed on, stopping two vaguely stoned-looking individuals walking across the quad. Aleu asked if they supported Amendment 4, which, she explained, would “put medical decisions back in the hands of women and their doctors, instead of extreme politicians.” (Perez had instructed the canvassers to avoid naming DeSantis or any other backers of the abortion ban, lest they turn off Republican supporters.) One of the young men, a student at Florida Gulf Coast University, said he’d seen a TikTok that taught him about Amendment 4 and also Amendment 3, which would legalize marijuana. “I’m supportive,” he said of the abortion-rights initiative. “I’m not a girl, so I don’t know how all that works. I’d rather just let them decide.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

The other guy, a UF student, didn’t know anything about Amendment 4 but said he was down with abortion rights. Nearby, another group of young people identified themselves as pro-choice and said they’d heard of the ballot initiative from TV commercials. “They want to ban abortion, right?” one asked, seemingly unaware that “they” already had.

When Perez got to campus this August and started campaigning, almost no one she talked to knew that abortion was on the ballot this year or that Florida even had an abortion ban in place. Two months in, she estimates that about half the campus now knows what’s going on. “The biggest challenge, honestly?” she said. “Getting the word out.”

Advertisement

The second-biggest challenge is getting people set up to vote. College students present an exasperating issue for campaigns: Many are not registered to vote, and if they are, they’re often registered in another state or county and need to be coached through the process of requesting a mail ballot or changing their registration. At the tailgate, a student in a UF muscle tee enthusiastically signed a card pledging to vote for Amendment 4. But, he said, he’s registered to vote in Miami-Dade County, which means he can’t show up at a polling place in Gainesville on Election Day. Wangensteen advised him that he had until Oct. 24 to request a mail ballot.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As the student walked away, I asked if he thought he’d actually make the effort to vote for the amendment he’d just promised to support. “It’s probably 50–50,” he said. “Depends on if I remember.” Turnout universe, indeed.

The day before the UF tailgate, I’d driven up to Tallahassee to visit Florida A&M University, where several hundred students gathered at a free outdoor concert in the middle of campus. At the edge of the crowd stood a purple tent with a “Yes on 4” sign and a Planned Parenthood banner.

Students saw the banner and started lining up. Campus chapters of Generation Action, a student pro-choice group associated with Planned Parenthood’s advocacy arm, have been giving out free Plan B—the morning-after pill—at events like this one across the state. Chapter president Taylor Bennett, 20, was one of a few young women staffing the booth. She said students approach the table just to pick up the medication, which would cost about $50 at a pharmacy—but once they’re there, “I have to get my little spiel in” about Amendment 4.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Wearing a button that read “More White Claw—Less Abortion Laws,” Bennett gave the students their brown paper baggies—and before they walked away, a few of them signed pledge cards for the amendment.

Advertisement

Another young woman under the purple tent, Florida State University student Michelle Gunn, was asking people in line if they were registered to vote. “I am, but in Pennsylvania,” one student said.

“Let’s get you registered in Florida,” Gunn said, handing the student a form. “All you need is the last four digits of your Social Security number.”

It is a measure of the nonpartisan commitment of the Amendment 4 campaign that Gunn didn’t think twice about how moving a Planned Parenthood–supporting voter from Pennsylvania to Florida might affect the presidential race. Organizers studiously refrain from assuming a voter’s general political bent based on their views on abortion, and they show no allegiance toward any candidate on the ballot, all the way to the presidential contenders. They all have their own personal wishes for the election—and are painfully aware that Trump got Roe overturned—but their goal is to restore abortion rights in Florida, something no one running for office would have the power to do.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Floridians Protecting Freedom isn’t authorized to register people to vote in Florida, and thanks to a law state Republicans passed last year, it’s much harder for any group to do so this cycle. So, to maximize its impact among college students, the campaign for Amendment 4 has partnered with voter-registration groups that are willing to abide by the strict new set of rules. Gunn is an organizer for one of them: Florida Future Leaders, a Democratic political action committee entirely comprising young people.

Advertisement

Jayden D’Onofrio, 19, a student at Tallahassee State College, co-founded the group in January in response to what he says is a strategic failure of the Florida Democratic Party. As a Democrat, he worried that his party was consigning the state to generations of Republican control by ignoring potential Gen Z voters, who’ve never known anything but GOP rule in Florida. “They could care less about politics because they’ve never been outreached to by a political party in this state,” D’Onofrio said. “They’ve never felt recognized. They’ve never felt seen. They’ve never felt like they’ve been heard on what issues matter to them.”

Since its founding, Florida Future Leaders has raised $800,000 to mobilize young Democratic and unaffiliated voters, specifically 18-to-23-year-olds. The organization has been running ads on Snapchat and Tinder, organizing massive text campaigns, and hiring dozens of college students to register voters on their campus quads every day until the election—sometimes up to 100 at one university in a single day. Its messaging focuses on specific political issues rather than candidates, an approach D’Onofrio says is in line with the way young people, who are easily disillusioned with leaders, usually come to political activism.

Advertisement

Advertisement

That’s one reason why he’s optimistic about this year’s election. “We have this beautiful thing on the ballot with Amendment 3 and Amendment 4,” D’Onofrio said. “You know, that alone is going to mobilize youth voters to the polls, because these are top issues for youth.”

Advertisement

Florida Future Leaders’ pitch to students leads with issues they care about, like legal abortion and weed. But unlike the main campaign for Amendment 4, the organization’s ultimate aim is partisan. D’Onofrio is confident that a rise in youth turnout driven by this year’s proposed amendments will have a beneficial trickle-down effect on the ballot for Democrats running for local office, the state Legislature—even the White House.

Advertisement

“Does that mean we’re going to flip the state? No, I don’t think so necessarily,” D’Onofrio said. “But it means we draw back the margins. And when you draw back the margins, you show that this is a state that you can still play in, that you can still win legislative seats in.”

In addition to flipping three state legislative districts from red to blue in areas where youth turnout was low in 2022, Amendments 3 and 4 are priority targets for Florida Future Leaders. On college campuses, the group has given out nearly 40,000 sets of rolling papers as part of a “Roll Up to the Polls” campaign, as well as nearly $70,000 worth of Plan B and tens of thousands of branded condoms that say, “Don’t get fucked by the GOP” on the wrapper. “We call it community organizing because that’s what it is. We’re giving out these necessities that students want and need, and oftentimes can’t afford,” D’Onofrio said. The hope is that students come away with both a reminder to vote for the amendments and a positive association with the party endorsing them.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Since the start of voting on Oct. 21, students hired by Florida Future Leaders have been driving golf carts across campuses to pick up willing riders and deposit them at the early-voting locations many schools have on-site. The group is also renting party buses to take fraternity members, sorority members, and Black and Latino student groups to the polls together.

Advertisement

“There is going to be a real youth mobilization and movement that happens in this state in this election that we’ve never seen before, and I don’t think people recognize it,” D’Onofrio said.

The leader of another new Florida organization, the progressive and nonpartisan Youth Action Fund, sees Amendment 4 as a chance to excite Gen Z–ers about politics after a dispiriting few years. This cohort has lived through DeSantis-led attacks on their school library books, college majors, and personal identities. When 19-year-old Cameron Driggers was in high school, for example, pride flags and “Safe Space” stickers were taken off the walls of his school, and the queer student group was disbanded. Driggers helped organized one of the many student walkouts that took place in Florida to protest DeSantis’ “Don’t Say Gay” bill. As a young person in Florida today, “you actually get to understand and see in real time what a reactionary and far-right movement looks like,” he said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“Following that, I wanted to be able to continue nurturing and building up a youth movement that was capable of taking back the state of Florida and resisting what I would consider a fascist government in our state,” he said. Now a student at the University of Florida, he started Youth Action Fund last year to harness the energy—and financially support the work—of young activists who want to do the same. In addition to registering voters in high schools and colleges, the organization has been providing voter files and pizza money to organizations like the College Democrats and Planned Parenthood Generation Action. It is also hosting block parties outside early voting locations to lure young people who might otherwise be too apathetic or disorganized to make the effort.

Advertisement

Working to pass Amendment 4 is part of the Youth Action Fund’s long game. “It represents a very practical way of activating and expanding the youth electorate,” Driggers said, because, in his experience, young people are far more motivated to vote for policies that excite them than against ones that don’t. His left-leaning peers have told him they’re turned off by Kamala Harris due to the Biden administration’s support of Israel’s ongoing assault on Gaza. Ballot initiatives like Amendment 4 provide a more appealing reason to get into politics—and if it passes, it’ll show young people they can make a lasting change. “It’s laying the groundwork for them to, later, place some value in voting,” Driggers said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Though the vast majority of students who know about Amendment 4 fully support it, some anti-abortion voices are trying to make themselves heard on Florida campuses. Earlier this month, at Florida State University, a student leadership group held a nonpartisan election information session with a local attorney who explained all the amendments on the ballot. Of the roughly 60 students there, only one-third had ever voted before. When a microphone went around for questions from the audience, Olivia McLean, a sophomore and the public relations director of the group that produced the event, expressed concern about Amendment 4.

“It’s my understanding that it will remove the need for parental consent when it comes to minors also getting abortions,” she said. The lawyer onstage told her that it would not; a state Supreme Court decision already requires parental consent for a minor’s abortion, and the amendment would not undo it.

Advertisement

After the FSU event, McLean told me that the moderators—fellow directors of the student leadership club—had initially told her she couldn’t ask her question, because she’d wanted to phrase it in more graphic terms, saying that “babies that are kicking” would have their “little limbs ripped off” at nine months’ gestation.

Advertisement

Still, she got in her point about parental consent, which is one of the right’s primary talking points. Anti-abortion advocates say that the wording of Amendment 4 is so vague that it would let anyone—a massage therapist, a tattoo artist—qualify as a “health care provider” to perform abortions, and that it would let anyone get an abortion up until the moment of birth. (That isn’t true—the amendment protects abortions after fetal viability only “when necessary to protect the patient’s health,” and it is not the responsibility of constitutional amendments to define terms like health care provider—the state Legislature does that.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

McLean calls herself a “centrist” on abortion—which to her means that each state should be able to make its own laws regulating it. This past summer, she interned for Rep. Anna Paulina Luna, a self-described “pro-life extremist” in Congress, and has also interned for Liberty Counsel, a Christian nonprofit that engages in anti-abortion litigation. McLean believes that Florida will reject Amendment 4 because DeSantis, who has done an “incredible job” as governor, has moved the state to the right. Until Election Day, she said, “it’s just going to be a lot of prayer and, you know, a lot of advocacy.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

But McLean isn’t involved in any campaign activities against Amendment 4. And she’s not the only anti-abortion die-hard sitting out this fight. In contrast to those trying to pass the amendment, many conservative groups aren’t doing anything at all to oppose it.

Advertisement

Related From Slate There’s New Evidence Against Ron DeSantis in Abortion Censorship Case Read More

I met Kylie Gillis, a sophomore at the University of Florida, at a campus event titled “Abortion Is Murder.” As a member of the UF chapter of Young Americans for Freedom, Gillis had helped bring right-wing media personality Liz Wheeler to speak to an audience of about 40 on how to convince Americans that abortion is wrong. Club members passed out stickers modeled after the Gadsden flag, with a silhouette of a fetus over the words “Don’t Tread On Me.”

In the Q&A session after Wheeler’s speech, which made a single mention of Amendment 4, Gillis asked her for help making the case against abortion-ban exceptions for rape and incest. “Morally, you need to be very kind to people who have been raped,” Gillis told me after the event—but as far as exceptions to abortion bans go, “personally, I would love it if there was never an abortion, ever.” Still, Gillis said she hadn’t joined any campaign actions to save Florida’s abortion ban—Students for Life might be doing something about it, she said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Students for Life, a prominent anti-abortion organization with 1,400 chapters across the country, did a bus tour around Florida colleges this spring. “We believe this is a ballot we can actually defeat,” said Mary-Logan Miske, Students for Life’s coordinator for campuses in the Southeast. The organization is putting “a lot of effort and emphasis” on Florida in hopes that the state will be the first in the country to reject abortion rights by popular vote. But when I asked her what the group had planned in the month before the election, she pointed to a single weekend in October, when volunteers would be door knocking in a suburb of Orlando.

The anti-abortion side is the incumbent in Florida. They already have their abortion ban, and since some voters will probably skip the Amendment 4 section of the ballot, they’ll need less than 40 percent of the vote to keep it. Young voters do not need to turn out in massive numbers for them to win. It speaks to the anti-abortion movement’s confidence in the strength of DeSantis’ Florida—and the steep odds facing Amendment 4—that individuals and groups who claim that abortion is literally murder have not built an operation to rival the tightly networked coalition that’s staging multiple daily campaign events for the other side.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As part of that effort, Ana Perez, the UF campus organizer, has recruited a team of 30 student volunteers, almost all of them as new to politics as her, to help her turn out the 60,000-student campus. It’s been energizing for them to campaign for an issue that engenders such moral clarity and will have a definite impact, as opposed to a shortcoming-riddled political candidate who may or may not be able to make the change they seek. Though they’re largely dyed-in-the-wool Democrats, the abortion ban feels like a big enough crisis that they’re happy to put aside their partisan loyalties to get Republicans on board. And in Florida, where state politics have been dominated by a Republican trifecta for 25 years, a nonpartisan campaign for a popular cause may be a necessary first crack in the foundation, even if the young voters who turn out for the amendment don’t care enough to vote for the Democrats on the ballot too.

At the UF tailgate, Perez set a goal for her eight volunteers to collect 100 cards from voters pledging to support the amendment. They got 40 before discouragement, exhaustion, and, eventually, a torrential downpour forced the group to disband.

Perez chose to focus on the positive—that was 40 new people who got a personal reminder that they can end Florida’s abortion ban in November. “To know that the stuff that I’m doing is what will swing the election is crazy,” she said. “But amazing.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) speaks during a town-hall-style Sept. 3 in Braselton, Ga. via Associated Press

A few years ago, the anti-Muslim bigot and conspiracy theorist Laura Loomer was so politically toxic that after she took a photo with Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.), Scott’s spokesperson claimed “the Senator had never met this person, that I’m aware of.”

On Tuesday, things were different. In an interview on Loomer’s podcast, Scott — who is locked in a relatively close reelection race with former Democratic Rep. Debbie Mucarsel-Powell and is trying to become the next Senate Republican leader — thanked the far-right activist and Donald Trump sycophant for “all your help in helping me win my election” for a second term as Florida’s governor in 2014. And Loomer showed off what she said were letters from Scott, including a letter he sent her as governor.

Advertisement

“To this day, from when I was a college student all the way to now, 12 years later, every time you see me, you know my name,” Loomer gushed, showing off what she said was a 2014 letter from Scott, apparently with her college address on it, and then saying she’d “saved every single note that you ever sent to me — because I really cherish these letters, Sen. Scott.”

“I’m very appreciative. I’ve been blessed,” Scott replied. “I’ve gotten to meet wonderful people and work with wonderful people. Congratulations on all your success.”

Loomer on Wednesday called Scott “the best candidate to be our next [Senate GOP] leader.” Spokespeople for the senator did not immediately respond to HuffPost’s request for comment.

The interview was a major get for Loomer, a Trump devotee who has in the past called herself a “proud Islamophobe” and “pro-white nationalism.” Loomer has repeatedly been a member of Trump’s campaign entourage this election season, including ahead of the GOP presidential nominee’s debate with Vice President Kamala Harris and at memorial events on Sept. 11.

Advertisement

Scott, the Florida conservative and Trump loyalist, is a long-shot candidate in the race to replace Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell as GOP leader in the Senate should he win reelection.

He’s vying against Senate Minority Whip John Thune (R-S.D.) and Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas), two longtime McConnell allies who are more aligned with the establishment wing of the party. Republican senators will choose their next leader in a closed-door election next month that will be held via a secret ballot.

“I’ve never understood why this wouldn’t be an open vote [for GOP leader],” Scott told Loomer on Tuesday, adding later that “this whole Washington establishment just despises the Trump voter.”

Some GOP senators have urged Trump to stay out of the race, warning it could backfire when the votes are kept secret, but conservatives are pushing for the former president to play a role in picking McConnell’s successor. And that could include leaning on people like Loomer, who has ties with Trump and who traveled with him on his plane last month.

Loomer’s ride-alongs came a year after she posted a video that called the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks an “inside job.” Earlier this year, Loomer referred to Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.), who was born in Somalia, as a “black dog” and “American in name only.” “I really do believe in IQ science” Loomer said, adding that “some of the people that have the lowest IQs are Somalis” and saying of the congresswoman, “is it really acceptable to have somebody who’s so inbred that they have an IQ that is legally classified as mental retardation?”

Advertisement

Loomer has also said Democrats should be executed, and that the White House “will smell like curry & White House speeches will be facilitated via a call center” if Harris — whose parents are from India and Jamaica — is elected. The racist comment drew strong rebukes from Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-Ga.), Sen. Thom Tillis (R-N.C.), and Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a top Trump ally. Graham called Loomer ”toxic″ and urged Trump to keep his distance from her.

“Some of the things she’s said about Republicans and others is disturbing,” Graham told HuffPost in September.

After endorsing Scott for GOP leader on Tuesday, Loomer warned in a social media post “about a few bad people who have been around Donald Trump lately who are giving him terrible advice on who to support in this Senate GOP race so that his entire 2nd term is undermined by people who have always hated him.”

The far-right Trump supporter pitched her show to Scott as an opportunity to lobby Trump voters — and Trump directly — for their help in the race for Senate GOP leader.

“We really appeal to the pulse of the MAGA base. President Trump himself listens to my show,” she said during the discussion. Later, she asked Scott, “What can the MAGA base do ... to get President Trump’s attention so that, one, he issues a statement calling for an open-ballot vote, and, two, he endorses you to become the next Senate GOP leader?”

Advertisement

“Let your voices be heard,” Scott responded, urging listeners to call Trump and their senators in support of his bid to lead Senate Republicans.

Much of the interview consisted of Loomer lobbing softballs to Scott regarding his competitors for the leadership post. But Loomer also pressed the Florida Republican on his stance on key Trumpian issues.

Asked by Loomer if he supported “mass deportations,” Scott said, “If you’re here illegally, you’re here illegally. It’s real simple. You shouldn’t be here. It’s as simple as that.” When Loomer brought up “election integrity,” Scott said people were “very concerned that Trump is going to win and then somehow Democrats are going to do something wrong.”

Most of all, though, Scott used his time with the well-known bigot and conspiracy theorist to pledge his loyalty to Trump, noting that he showed up in support of Trump at the Manhattan courtroom where Trump was ultimately found guilty of a hush money scheme.

“We need to have somebody that’s going to represent the Republican Trump voters,” he said of his bid for Senate leadership, adding later: “No one’s been a bigger supporter in the Senate than me for Donald Trump and what he believes in. ... Right now, it’s really just the Washington establishment versus Republicans that want to elect Trump.”

Advertisement
It wasn’t the part of her closing message that generated the most headlines, but in her remarks at the Ellipse, Vice President Kamala Harris took some time to talk about health care policy.

“[Y]ou will pay even more if Donald Trump finally gets his way and repeals the Affordable Care Act, which will throw tens of millions of Americans off their health insurance, and take us back to when insurance companies had the power to deny people with pre-existing conditions,” the Democratic candidate said. “Well, we are not going back.”

These were not scare tactics. Rather, this was a final week wake-up call to voters who care about health security: This issue is on the ballot whether it’s dominating the public conversation or not. NBC News reported:

House Speaker Mike Johnson took a dig at Obamacare at an event in Pennsylvania on Monday, telling a crowd there would be “massive” health care changes in America if Donald Trump wins the election. “Health care reform’s going to be a big part of the agenda. When I say we’re going to have a very aggressive first 100 days agenda, we got a lot of things still on the table,” Johnson, R-La., said in Bethlehem as he campaigned for GOP House candidate Ryan Mackenzie, according to video obtained by NBC News.

When an attendee asked, “No Obamacare?” Congress’ top Republican leader replied, “No Obamacare.” Johnson added that he wants to see “massive” reforms to the existing system.

When it comes to GOP leaders, the House speaker isn’t alone. Donald Trump, for example, declared at the recent presidential debate that he has “concepts of a plan” that would replace the nation’s existing health care system.

Around the same time, his running mate, Republican Sen. JD Vance of Ohio, shared new details about his plans to weaken protections for Americans with pre-existing conditions — which came on the heels of the senator leaving ACA repeal on the table in a possible second term for Trump.

As regular readers know, Trump has also spent much of the last year repeatedly targeting the Affordable Care Act in increasingly explicit terms, and as recently as December, the Republican nominee posted a video to his social media platform attacking the late Sen. John McCain for not helping him “terminate” the ACA in 2017.

What’s more, Axios published a report last fall noting that Republican Sen. Mike Crapo of Idaho, who’d likely chair the Senate Finance Committee if the GOP retakes control of the chamber, also said he’s open to repeal-and-replace plans.

I’m mindful of the broader election season conversation and the degree to which health care has not enjoyed the national spotlight, at least not on par with the economy and border security. But in the cycle’s closing days, it’s not too late to add this to the national discussion.

A recent national Gallup poll found two-thirds of Americans said health care needed to be discussed more as part of this year’s elections. Surprisingly, the results weren’t altogether partisan: A majority of Democrats, Republicans and independent voters all agreed that health care hasn’t gotten enough attention.

With this in mind, the House speaker has given the political world a timely excuse to focus on an issue voters want to hear more about.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
A version of this story appeared in CNN’s What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here.

CNN —

For much of the presidential campaign, former President Donald Trump worked to distance himself from Project 2025, the detailed game plan written by conservative activists for a second Trump term.

Whether or not his allies will try to implement portions of the controversial plan if he wins the 2024 election is still the topic of some debate.

But there is an equally radical and expansive government reformation plan coming out of Trump’s own mouth, in which heterodox figures like Robert F. Kennedy Jr. would be given free rein to “go wild” on the health safety system and Elon Musk would be enabled to, as the tech billionaire said, “start from scratch” with the federal workforce.

Separately, Trump’s transition co-chair appeared on CNN Wednesday night to argue Kennedy and Musk probably wouldn’t be given specific government jobs but that Kennedy would be given data in order to question vaccines.

So without getting bogged down in whether Trump does or does not support Project 2025, here’s a look at what the former president and the people he says he would empower have said they would do if he wins the White House.

‘Go wild’ with RFK Jr.

Trump has promised to give Kennedy leeway to remake the way the government health apparatus protects Americans.

“I’m going to let him go wild on the food. I’m going to let him go wild on the medicines,” Trump said during his closing argument rally at Madison Square Garden on Sunday.

Much of what Kennedy pushes sounds positive. His “Make America Healthy Again” PAC promises to focus on “prioritizing regenerative agriculture, preserving natural habitats, and eliminating toxins from our food, water, and air.”

But those ideas are short on specifics, and there are personal issues that would impede anyone else from government service. Kennedy compared vaccine requirements with the Nazi Germany era, claiming Anne Frank was in a better situation; was once arrested for heroin possession; and has pushed wild conspiracy theories about chemicals in the water making children gay or transgender.

Kennedy’s own health has also been a concern. He once ate so much tuna and perch that he experienced “severe brain fog” from mercury poisoning, he told The New York Times.

Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and former President Donald Trump shake hands during a campaign rally at Desert Diamond Arena on August 23, 2024, in Glendale, Arizona. Rebecca Noble/Getty Images

In video obtained by CNN, Kennedy told supporters on Monday that Trump had promised to give him sweeping power over multiple agencies if the former president wins the election.

“The key that I think I’m – you know, that President Trump has promised me is – is control of the public health agencies, which are HHS (Department of Health and Human Services) and its sub-agencies, CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), FDA (Food and Drug Administration), NIH (National Institutes of Health) and a few others, and then also the USDA (Department of Agriculture), which is – which, you know, is key to making America healthy. Because we’ve got to get off of seed oils, and we’ve got to get off of pesticide intensive agriculture,” Kennedy said.

In an interview with CNN’s Kaitlan Collins, Howard Lutnick, co-chair of the Trump-Vance transition team, said Kennedy would not be in charge of HHS but would be given access to data about vaccines in order to check their safety. But vaccines that are currently approved and authorized for use in the US have been proven safe and effective. Lutnick also pushed unproven conspiracy theories that vaccines are behind autism in children. Although it is still unclear what causes autism, the scientific consensus is that vaccines do not.

“He says, ‘If you give me the data, all I want is the data, and I’ll take on the data and show that it’s not safe.’ And then if you pull the product liability (protections), the companies will yank these vaccines right off, off of the market,” Lutnick said.

Meanwhile, “Trump’s plans have been met with alarm in the public health community, not so much for the specific policy proposals Kennedy has communicated as part of his ‘Make America Healthy Again’ platform as much as for the key issue he’s been leaving out: vaccines,” according to CNN’s Meg Tirrell. She wrote an in-depth review of Kennedy’s record on health issues.

Both Trump and Kennedy have expressed vaccine skepticism, and Kennedy has been a longtime activist pushing debunked theories about vaccines. During the campaign, Kennedy has deemphasized his views on vaccines, Tirrell notes. His push for more natural food does find support among some health experts.

‘Start from scratch’ with Musk

Musk, the superrich Trump supporter, would be given a much wider portfolio than Kennedy and be charged with a massive downsizing of the federal government.

It’s an even stickier situation since Musk’s many companies, including SpaceX and Tesla, have a profit-motivated interest in business with the government. The US government currently relies on SpaceX, which also owns the satellite internet provider Starlink.

If there’s any doubt that a Musk government role could be a risk for conflict of interest, simply look at the fact that he has said he could be in charge of the “Department of Government Efficiency.” DOGE is the name of Musk’s cryptocurrency, an area the Trump family is also keen to enter.

Lutnick told Collins that Musk wouldn’t enter the government because he can’t sell SpaceX but would instead be writing software to give to the government.

Musk has been no stranger to making headlines as his support for Trump has been on full display this campaign season. He is currently trying to move a lawsuit over his $1 million giveaway to voters into federal court, potentially averting a hearing Thursday in Philadelphia state court that he was required to attend. At the center of the legal battle is a daily $1 million sweepstakes that Musk’s pro-Trump super PAC, called America PAC, is offering to registered voters in battleground states.

His lawyers filed a “motion of removal” in federal court late Wednesday night. This typically pauses the state case and puts the matter in the hands of a federal judge – unless and until that judge decides to send the case back to state courts.

Musk is also constantly pushing out antisemitic things and has mused about how women shouldn’t vote. Not to mention reports of his meetings with hostile foreign leaders.

In a potential new Trump administration, Musk promises a reinvention of the federal bureaucracy.

“Let’s start from scratch,” Musk said at an event in October in Pittsburgh, suggesting a drastic remaking of the federal bureaucracy.

SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk speaks at a town hall with Republican candidate for Senate Dave McCormick at the Roxain Theater in Pittsburgh on October 20, 2024. Michael Swensen/Getty Images/File

CNN’s David Goldman looked this month at what Trump and Musk have said about a potential Musk role in government, which would be focused on steep spending cuts – Musk has said he could trim $2 trillion, perhaps with help from artificial intelligence – and rolling back regulations. But he’d do it in a nice way, apparently.

“Musk has promised a gentle touch, offering generous severance packages to laid-off government workers, while at the same time proposing an assessment system that threatens layoffs to wasteful employees,” Goldman wrote.

The problem, according to the former Treasury Secretary Larry Summer, is that there’s not $2 trillion to be gained from massive government layoffs.

“Respectfully, I think it is idiotic,” Summers said on Fox News this week. “These people think it’s like some business. But here’s the problem: Only 15% of the federal budget is for payroll. So even if you took all the employees, every single person working for the federal government out, you couldn’t save anything like $2 trillion.”

Summers has a point about payroll. The government spent about $271 billion to compensate 2.3 million civilian employees in 2022, according to the Congressional Budget Office.

Summers said that to achieve trillions in cuts, Musk would have to look at Social Security and Medicare benefits, something Trump has promised not to do.

‘No Obamacare’

House Speaker Mike Johnson, a top Trump ally, said in Pennsylvania on Monday that if Trump wins and Republicans keep the House, there would be a “massive” overhaul of the health care system. “No Obamacare?” shouted an attendee at the campaign event. “No Obamacare,” Johnson said.

He added: “The ACA is so deeply ingrained; we need massive reform to make this work. And we got a lot of ideas on how to do that.”

During a debate with Vice President Kamala Harris in September, Trump did not give specifics, but he did say he had “concepts” of a plan. These have not been shared publicly.

Trump tried, and failed, during his time in White House to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but retooling the health care system is clearly still a priority for Republicans.

Drastic change won’t be easy

This is a good spot to point out that no matter what Trump is promising Kennedy and Musk, and no matter what Johnson hopes to do about health care, the realities of the US government make drastic change hard to achieve.

A minority in the Senate, assuming it’s larger than 40 senators, could block any attempt to really undo the Affordable Care Act. The Senate is supposed to confirm top officials like Cabinet secretaries, although Trump and other presidents found ways around that rule in the Constitution. It’s not clear if Kennedy could find the votes to be confirmed as secretary of Health and Human Services or if Trump would even nominate him. If Kennedy had a role in the White House, his ability to enact sweeping change would be limited.

While presidents have authority over the federal workforce and Trump was working to reclassify many federal employees to make them easier to fire when he was president, a “start from scratch” scenario would theoretically require congressional approval.

Not that we can say with any certainty what would require congressional approval since, unlike with the detailed Project 2025 plan, there are no specifics to match any of these big ideas. At least not yet.

This story has been updated with additional developments.
Harris urged unity in her closing argument. Biden's 'garbage' line undercut that

toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/AFP

Vice President Harris found herself having to do clean-up on Wednesday — the day after a major address where she pledged to turn the page on an era of division in the country — because of a divisive remark made by President Biden.

Biden had made comments in a video call on Tuesday evening that sounded like he was calling supporters of former President Donald Trump "garbage."

Republicans took offense and drew a through line to Hillary Clinton's 2016 comment about the "basket of deplorables" supporting Trump.

"How do you like my garbage truck?" Trump asked reporters traveling with him in Green Bay, Wis., where a trash hauler had been emblazoned with his campaign logo for the occasion.

toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

"This truck is in honor of Kamala and Joe Biden," he said.

Sponsor Message

Still wearing a reflective vest from the photo op at his subsequent rally, Trump said: "I have to begin by saying, 250 million Americans are not garbage." He was seemingly describing the number of his supporters, though he received 63 million votes in 2016, when he won, and 74 million in 2020, when he lost.

Earlier in the day, in Rocky Mount, N.C., Trump said Biden's "garbage" comments revealed "what he and Kamala really think of our supporters," adding, "My response to Joe and Kamala is very simple: you can't lead America if you don't love Americans."

Republicans drew a through line from "garbage" to "deplorables"

Conservatives have long complained that Democrats have used disparaging labels to describe their supporters.

"You know, Barack Obama said that we were bitter clingers. Hillary Clinton said we were deplorables ... And then Joe Biden says that we're garbage. Well, we have news for the Democrat elites. We're none of those things. We are Americans," Rep. Byron Donalds, R-Fla., said at Trump's Rocky Mount rally.

Biden's comment has given Trump an opening to move past the controversy unleashed by a disparaging and politically toxic joke about Puerto Rico made by a comedian during Sunday's Madison Square Garden rally.

That joke has roiled the presidential campaign in its waning days as Puerto Ricans are a significant presence in places like Pennsylvania, which both the Trump and Harris campaigns see as a must-win state.

toggle caption Brendan Smialowski/AFP

Harris has been trying to appeal to moderate Republicans and independents

Harris — who has been trying to appeal to moderate Republican and independent voters in swing states — had to respond to questions about Biden as she departed for Wednesday stops in North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Her running mate, Gov. Tim Walz, also had to address the issue during two major television appearances.

Sponsor Message

"Let me be clear: I strongly disagree with any criticism of people based on who they vote for," Harris told reporters.

In Raleigh, she added a new line to her stump speech, pleading with her supporters to "please be intentional about building coalitions" in the final days of the race.

What Biden said

In a video call Tuesday with Voto Latino, Biden was making comments about the comic at the Trump rally when he said something that sounded like he was calling Trump supporters “garbage.”

The White House quickly issued a transcript seeking to put Biden’s comment in a broader context, insisting that Biden had said "supporter's," to refer to the comedian's quote and not "supporters."

"And just the other day, a speaker at his rally called Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage.' Well, let me tell you something. I don't -- I -- I don't know the Puerto Rican that -- that I know -- or a Puerto Rico, where I'm fr- -- in my home state of Delaware, they're good, decent, honorable people. The only garbage I see floating out there is his supporter's -- his -- his demonization of Latinos is unconscionable, and it's un-American."



Later, Biden attempted to clean up his remarks on x.com, saying that he was referring to the comedian’s joke at the rally.

Biden, who has a life-long history of gaffes, has kept a low profile since he dropped out of the race and endorsed Harris. Last week at a rare campaign event, he attracted attention when he said of Trump “we got to lock him up,” before quickly adding “politically.”

NPR's Stephen Fowler contributed to this story from Rocky Mount, N.C.
Puerto Ricans weren’t the only targets at Donald Trump’s Sunday night event at Madison Square Garden, but they’re the ones causing the former president the biggest political headache in the final week of the 2024 race.

The Republican held an event where the audience heard a warm-up speaker refer to Puerto Rico as an “island of garbage,” among other derogatory remarks about Latinos that were peddled at the gathering. The backlash has been fierce, causing unease among party officials.

The chairman of the GOP in Puerto Rico announced he’d withhold support for Trump unless the former president apologized for Sunday’s racism. At least for now, that’s not going to happen.

For Trump, Step One was holding a hate-filled event. Step Two was ignoring the controversy the day after it erupted. Step Three involved pretending that he hadn’t headlined a hate-filled event, telling the public that he considered it a “lovefest.”

When these efforts didn’t appear to help, the former president moved on to a dubious Step Four. The New York Times reported:

In a moment that seemed highly choreographed — given the fallout from a comedian’s offensive joke about Puerto Ricans at Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally — a Puerto Rican woman [at a roundtable event held in Drexel Hill, Pa.] tells Trump that Puerto Ricans stand behind him. Trump thanks her and claims, implausibly, that no president has done more for Puerto Rico than he did.

In fact, the Republican spent much of the day declaring, “I think no president’s done more for Puerto Rico than I have.”

This wasn’t just ridiculous, it also created an opportunity to highlight his awful his record toward the island. A separate Times report noted, for example, “As president, Mr. Trump fought bitterly with [Carmen Yulín Cruz, the former San Juan mayor] and other Puerto Rican leaders, and resisted sending billions of dollars in aid after the territory was ravaged by back-to-back hurricanes in 2017. He made angry comments on social media and tossed paper towels at Puerto Ricans during a visit that few, if any, have forgotten. He even wondered privately if the United States could sell the island.”

The report added that the Republican Party’s platform “no longer mentions statehood for Puerto Rico, a position the party had held before Mr. Trump’s relationship with the island soured.”

All of which helped set the stage for Step Five: feigning ignorance and pretending the controversy isn’t real.

Sitting down for his latest interview with Fox News’ Sean Hannity, Trump said of Tony Hinchcliffe, “I have no idea who he is,” and adding that “they” were responsible for giving him a speaking slot.

“What they’ve done is taken somebody who has nothing to do with the party, has nothing to do with us, said something, and they try and make a big deal,” Trump went on to tell Hannity. “But I don’t know who it is, I don’t even know who put him in. And I can’t imagine it’s a big deal.”

If that sounds to you like wishful thinking, we’re on the same page.

It would’ve been easy for the Republican candidate to denounce the racist rhetoric at his own event on Sunday. Trump also had the option of expressing regret and/or taking some responsibility for the depraved rhetoric at his own rally.

He’s chosen a different, more Trumpian path.
An Elon Musk-backed political group is posting fake Kamala Harris ads on Facebook

toggle caption Progress 2028 via Meta's Ad Library/Screenshot by NPR

Did you see those Kamala Harris ads on Facebook? Be careful. They might have duped you.

A series of ads that look like they are from the Harris campaign are spreading falsehoods about her current policy positions, including that she wants to institute a mandatory gun-buyback program and give Medicare benefits and drivers’ licenses to undocumented immigrants. One of the ads asserts Harris wants to ban fracking. None of this is true.

The Facebook ads have collectively been viewed millions of times in swing states, posted by an account dubbed “Progress 2028,” a name suggesting a liberal counterpart to the Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025.

Sponsor Message

But there is no such Harris-aligned initiative as Progress 2028. And the ads are bankrolled by Building America’s Future, a dark money group funded by billionaire Elon Musk and others, according to campaign tracking site Open Secrets. It’s part of the more than $100 million Musk has spent to help re-elect former president Donald Trump, campaign finance records show.

The ad buys are publicly available in an ad library database hosted by Meta, Facebook’s parent company. It shows that so far the group has posted 13 of these ads. As of Wednesday afternoon, Meta tallied the ads as having received 8.7 million impressions, although some viewers may have seen the same ads multiple times.

Experts told NPR that there is nothing illegal about the ads, since the First Amendment protects political speech, even when it contains lies. But the messages have the potential to lead voters astray just days before the election.

“The tactic isn’t new,” said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center, on the strategy of using trickery to smear a political opponent. “Its potential reach and impact are. Social media greatly expanded the capacity of well-financed, skilled ad buyers to micro-target susceptible undecided voters without risking a backlash from those likely to recognize the deception.”

Robert Weissman, co-president of the nonprofit watchdog group Public Citizen, said that in this case, the disclosure at the bottom of the ad stating the advertisement was “paid for by Progress 2028” fuels the deceit.

“It truthfully discloses who is paying for the ad, but that entity sounds like a Harris supporting organization, when it is not,” said Weissman, who has called on Meta to remove the ads.

Meta spokesman Ryan Daniels would not comment directly on the Progress 2028 ads, which were first highlighted by the tech news site 404 Media. But the ads do not appear to run afoul of Meta’s advertising rules, which mostly require that the entity paying for the ad be disclosed. The rules also ban premature claims of victory and ads that question the legitimacy of the election process.

Sponsor Message

Daniels said deceptive political ads have been deployed “across the media landscape for decades,” adding that Meta’s Ad Library, where the reach of ads can be viewed, “brings a level of transparency to political advertising that far exceeds that of any other platform where these ads have run.”

As it did in 2020, Meta will not allow new political advertisements to be placed the week leading up to the Nov. 5 election, but political ads can still appear on the company’s platforms if purchased before the week of the election.

After Nov. 5, political ads on Facebook and Instagram can resume, which is a change from 2020, when such advertising was banned post-election. Google, meanwhile, will block election ads after Nov. 5 to tamp down any falsehoods that may spread in the event votes are still being counted then.

Weissman says this is not enough. “Meta is disdaining responsibility for permitting this deception, but Meta is 100 percent responsible,” Weissman said. “Yes, there is a First Amendment right to lie, but that does not constrain Meta’s management of advertisements on its platform.”

Open Secrets found that Progress 2028 also sent text messages to potential voters making false claims about Harris’ policy positions with a link to the Progress 2028 web page, which gives the impression it is a group backing Harris for president, when the opposite is true.

The site states that “when Kamala Harris takes office, we will have a never-before-seen opportunity to enact sweeping reforms that will ensure that equity across every corner of America is finally a reality,” before launching into a series of policy proposals Harris does not in fact endorse in the 2024 race.

Building America’s Future and a consulting group tied to Progress 2028 did not return requests for comment.

Weissman with Public Citizen said mischaracterizing a candidate’s stances is a common political messaging tactic, but outright lies framed as if they are coming from the candidate goes beyond a brazen distortion.

Sponsor Message

“Whether they are impactful is another question, but they are highly likely to deceive,” he said. “They seem real and the only way to recognize they are not is if you are a highly informed voter who knows the claims are untrue.”
Voting officials face an 'uphill battle' to fight election lies

toggle caption Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP via Getty Images

Last week, a video began circulating on X, formerly Twitter, purporting to show a person in Pennsylvania ripping up ballots marked for former President Donald Trump and leaving alone those marked for Vice President Harris.

The person curses the former president multiple times and at one point says, “Vote Harris.”

The video is a fake. The envelopes and ballots shown don’t match what that county actually uses to vote. U.S. officials said it was created and spread by Russia to sow doubt in the election.

But the incident showed what has been clear for some time now: Online in 2024, the deck is stacked against voting officials, maybe even more so than in 2020. The phony video was viewed hundreds of thousands of times shortly after it was posted. A statement from Bucks County debunking it three hours later was shared on X fewer than 100 times.

Sponsor Message

“They're fighting an uphill battle,” said Darren Linvill, co-director of Clemson University’s Media Forensics Hub, which tracks election influence campaigns. “I'm sure that they often feel like they're trying to put their finger in the dike before it bursts.”

Linvill traced the video back to a Russian propaganda operation, first identified by Clemson, that has also spread faked videos targeting Harris and her running mate Tim Walz in recent weeks.

With less than a week left of voting, the election cycle has entered a fraught stage in which rumors, misleading claims and conspiracy theories are surging. And election administrators, intelligence officials and researchers don’t expect that to end when polls close. They are bracing for what is expected to be a contentious period of counting and certifying votes, in which discord fueled by foreign and domestic sources could be corrosive to democracy.

Perhaps the biggest factor is former President Donald Trump, who continues to falsely assert he won the 2020 election, despite courts and investigations finding no evidence of fraud. He has already set the stage to reject the results should he lose again this year.

“If I lose — I’ll tell you what, it’s possible. Because they cheat. That’s the only way we’re gonna lose, because they cheat,” Trump said at a September rally in Michigan.

Despite the lack of evidence, his claims have been embraced by many Republicans and eroded confidence in voting among a wide swath of Americans.

“We’ve already set the standard that you are allowed to doubt the results on Election Day,” said Linvill. “And that just doesn’t bode well.”

Sponsor Message

America’s geopolitical adversaries — particularly Russia, Iran and China — are expected to seize on election fraud claims, however unfounded, and generate their own material undermining the results, as part of their larger goals to sow chaos and discredit democracy.

Officials charged with safeguarding voting say they’ve learned and are applying many lessons from 2016 and 2020 — but are also confronting a new set of challenges this year, including advances in artificial intelligence that make it easier and cheaper to generate realistic but fake images, video, audio and text, and the emergence of X owner Elon Musk as a leading Trump surrogate, donor and amplifier of election fraud conspiracy theories.

“Going into the 2024 election cycle, we are arguably facing the most complex threat environment compared to a prior cycle,” said Cait Conley, who oversees election security efforts within the Department of Homeland Security’s cyber agency, in an interview with NPR.



Foreign powers seize on divisive issues

To meet that heightened risk, government officials are counting on transparency and warnings to help Americans gird themselves against manipulation.

Federal intelligence and law enforcement officials are taking a more aggressive approach this year in calling out foreign meddling. It’s a stark difference from 2016, when the Obama administration was reticent to make public information about the full scope of Russia’s efforts favoring Trump until after the election.

This year, Russia is angling to boost Trump, as it did in the previous two presidential elections, while Iran is trying to undermine the former president, the intelligence community and private sector researchers say. China is targeting down-ballot races but does not appear to have a preference in the presidential race. All three regularly seize on divisive issues, from immigration to abortion to Israel’s war in Gaza, to exacerbate discord among Americans. And they’ve all experimented with using AI to churn out more misleading content.

Sponsor Message

“Our adversaries know that misinformation and disinformation is cheap and effective,” said Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., who chairs the Senate intelligence committee, in an interview with NPR.

The federal government moved quickly to publicly attribute the fake Pennsylvania ballot video to Russia the day after the video first appeared on X — a notably rapid turnaround for intelligence and law enforcement officials. And they warned they expect more such fakes in the coming days and weeks.

In September, the Justice Department seized web domains it says Russian operatives used to spoof American news outlets and spread fake stories, indicted employees of Kremlin-backed broadcaster RT in a scheme to fund right-wing pro-Trump American influencers, and brought criminal charges against Iranian hackers accused of targeting the Trump campaign.

DHS’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the FBI have issued joint public service announcements alerting Americans to tactics foreign actors might use to discredit the election, including ransomware attacks or falsely claiming to have hacked voter registration systems.

Officials say, so far, there’s no sign that foreign adversaries have breached any election or voting systems. But attackers don’t have to succeed in order to undermine confidence, Conley, the election security expert, said.

“While these things like a [distributed denial of service] attack or ransomware could be disruptive to the elections process, it's not going to undermine the security or integrity of the vote casting or counting process,” Conley said. “But our adversaries may try to convince the American people otherwise.”

At all levels of government, the message is consistent: Turn to the people running local elections for authoritative voting information.

“What we are really trying to encourage them to do is to know that it is your state and local election official that is the signal through that noise,” Conley said.

And local election officials are making more of an effort than ever before to seek out media attention and educate the public on their processes. State election officials in a number of swing states have started holding multiple press conferences per week leading up to Nov. 5.

Sponsor Message

“It's really important for us to get the message out there first and be as proactive as possible,” said Isaac Cramer, who runs elections in Charleston County, S.C.



Partisan and splintered realities

The very subject of election “disinformation” itself has been turned into a partisan fight. A coordinated Republican legal and political campaign to cast efforts to mitigate or track the spread of falsehoods online as “censorship” has undercut the work of government agencies, online platforms and researchers, and driven one institution out of the field.

Last month, Warner wrote an open letter urging CISA to do more to help state and local governments identify and respond to election misinformation and disinformation campaigns, and to coordinate communications between the government, tech companies and researchers.

“The government needs to get this information out as quickly as possible, because literally the stakes are nothing less than our democracy,” Warner told NPR.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

Cramer, the election official in South Carolina, said one challenge for local governments dealing with false information online is how splintered the internet is. He’s recently started seeing a lot more wrong voting information on NextDoor, for instance.

“We can't possibly have eyes on every platform and see everything that is being posted,” Cramer said.

Increasingly election officials are thinking outside the box to reach voters, because trying to fight fire with fire on social media has felt like a losing battle for years now, says Carolina Lopez, a former election official from Miami-Dade County, Fla.

“Election officers around the country spend a whole lot of time producing content for social media, and it always kills me when I see, like, three likes and it's usually themselves, their [spokesperson] and their mom,” said Lopez, who now runs the Partnership for Large Election Jurisdictions. “Election officials are trying to figure out, ‘Well, what else can I do to be heard?’”

Sponsor Message

In Montgomery County, Pa., Neil Makhija fashioned a voting ice cream truck to travel his county and help people vote. Cramer, in Charleston County, co-wrote a children’s book. Derek Bowens, in Durham County, N.C., created an app that could deliver accurate election information directly to people there.



The world’s richest man’s megaphone

One of the loudest voices elevating unverified rumors and outright falsehoods about the 2024 election also controls a major communications platform. Musk, the world’s richest man, took control of Twitter two years ago and has remade the site, now called X, into a pro-Trump megaphone.

Musk has become a major vector for baseless claims that Democrats are bringing in immigrants to illegally vote for them — a conspiracy theory Trump and other Republicans have embraced and are using to lay the groundwork to claim the election was stolen should he lose.

When election officials try to correct Musk’s false claims, he has lashed out. Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson told CBS News that she and her staff received threats and harassing messages after Musk called her a liar when she fact-checked his claim that the state has more registered voters than eligible citizens.

Musk has also shared AI-generated content on X without disclosure, including images and videos of Harris doing and saying things she didn’t.

Musk’s America PAC is inviting users to share “potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities” on an “Election Integrity Community” on X that has more than 40,000 members. The feed is filled with allegations that voting machines are switching votes from Trump to Harris and posts casting doubt on the security of mail-in ballots — both frequently debunked narratives in 2020 — as well as copies of the fake Bucks County video.

Danielle Lee Tomson, research manager at the University of Washington’s Center for an Informed Public, said such “evidence generation infrastructure” is more robust this year. Even when these efforts identify real issues with voting, they tend to ignore the checks in the system that catch problems, she said.

Sponsor Message

“If you see something seemingly suspicious, and then you take a picture of it and post it online, that can be decontextualized so quickly and not take into account all of the various remedies or the fact that there's nothing suspicious there at all,” she said.

Local election officials are making their processes more transparent than ever this year, including livestreaming counting facilities, and welcoming record numbers of election monitors. But such openness is a double-edged sword: Video feeds provide more material for content creators who may use it to push their own narratives of malfeasance — such as the false claims against Georgia election workers amplified by Trump in 2020. That leaves officials operating with the knowledge that their every move will be scrutinized.

“We try to not commit unforced errors,” said Stephen Richer, the Republican recorder in Maricopa County, Ariz., who has been an outspoken debunker of election lies. “But at the end of the day, if somebody really wants to make something look weird, I think they can do it, unfortunately.”



Social media steps back

In 2020, major social media platforms proactively boosted election officials as authoritative sources of information, made misleading posts about voting less visible, and added warning labels to false claims. Now, Musk has cut most of X’s team policing the platform and removed many guardrails against false and misleading content.

X is the most glaring example, but other platforms have also backed away from the more aggressive stance they took in 2020, cut back on the number of people working on trust and safety, and are generally more quiet about the work they are doing. Meta now lets Facebook and Instagram users opt out of some features of its fact-checking program, while its text-based social network, Threads, has deemphasized news and politics.

Warner told NPR he’s concerned social media platforms have stepped back at a time when threats, including from AI-generated content, are more urgent.

Sponsor Message

“Think about the devastating effect it’d have if somebody uses an AI image of what looks like an election official somehow destroying ballots or, you know, breaking into a drop box,” he said. “That kind of imagery could literally spark violence in a close election after the fact and again undermine Americans’ confidence in our system.”

In the face of that landscape, election officials say they are controlling what they can control. They have spent countless hours reaching out to skeptical voters over the past four years, and they’re now clinging onto hope that work will make a difference in people's willingness to accept election results.

Michael Adams, the Republican secretary of state of Kentucky, is hoping the novelty of election denial will start wearing off as well.

“For a while there, every six months, they'd come up with a new conspiracy theory. It would be debunked. They'd have egg on their face. They go back in their hole for six months and then come back,” Adams said. “You only get so many bites at that apple.”
Voting officials face an 'uphill battle' to fight election lies

toggle caption Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP via Getty Images

Last week, a video began circulating on X, formerly Twitter, purporting to show a person in Pennsylvania ripping up ballots marked for former President Donald Trump and leaving alone those marked for Vice President Harris.

The person curses the former president multiple times and at one point says, “Vote Harris.”

The video is a fake. The envelopes and ballots shown don’t match what that county actually uses to vote. U.S. officials said it was created and spread by Russia to sow doubt in the election.

But the incident showed what has been clear for some time now: Online in 2024, the deck is stacked against voting officials, maybe even more so than in 2020. The phony video was viewed hundreds of thousands of times shortly after it was posted. A statement from Bucks County debunking it three hours later was shared on X fewer than 100 times.

Sponsor Message

“They're fighting an uphill battle,” said Darren Linvill, co-director of Clemson University’s Media Forensics Hub, which tracks election influence campaigns. “I'm sure that they often feel like they're trying to put their finger in the dike before it bursts.”

Linvill traced the video back to a Russian propaganda operation, first identified by Clemson, that has also spread faked videos targeting Harris and her running mate Tim Walz in recent weeks.

With less than a week left of voting, the election cycle has entered a fraught stage in which rumors, misleading claims and conspiracy theories are surging. And election administrators, intelligence officials and researchers don’t expect that to end when polls close. They are bracing for what is expected to be a contentious period of counting and certifying votes, in which discord fueled by foreign and domestic sources could be corrosive to democracy.

Perhaps the biggest factor is former President Donald Trump, who continues to falsely assert he won the 2020 election, despite courts and investigations finding no evidence of fraud. He has already set the stage to reject the results should he lose again this year.

“If I lose — I’ll tell you what, it’s possible. Because they cheat. That’s the only way we’re gonna lose, because they cheat,” Trump said at a September rally in Michigan.

Despite the lack of evidence, his claims have been embraced by many Republicans and eroded confidence in voting among a wide swath of Americans.

“We’ve already set the standard that you are allowed to doubt the results on Election Day,” said Linvill. “And that just doesn’t bode well.”

Sponsor Message

America’s geopolitical adversaries — particularly Russia, Iran and China — are expected to seize on election fraud claims, however unfounded, and generate their own material undermining the results, as part of their larger goals to sow chaos and discredit democracy.

Officials charged with safeguarding voting say they’ve learned and are applying many lessons from 2016 and 2020 — but are also confronting a new set of challenges this year, including advances in artificial intelligence that make it easier and cheaper to generate realistic but fake images, video, audio and text, and the emergence of X owner Elon Musk as a leading Trump surrogate, donor and amplifier of election fraud conspiracy theories.

“Going into the 2024 election cycle, we are arguably facing the most complex threat environment compared to a prior cycle,” said Cait Conley, who oversees election security efforts within the Department of Homeland Security’s cyber agency, in an interview with NPR.



Foreign powers seize on divisive issues

To meet that heightened risk, government officials are counting on transparency and warnings to help Americans gird themselves against manipulation.

Federal intelligence and law enforcement officials are taking a more aggressive approach this year in calling out foreign meddling. It’s a stark difference from 2016, when the Obama administration was reticent to make public information about the full scope of Russia’s efforts favoring Trump until after the election.

This year, Russia is angling to boost Trump, as it did in the previous two presidential elections, while Iran is trying to undermine the former president, the intelligence community and private sector researchers say. China is targeting down-ballot races but does not appear to have a preference in the presidential race. All three regularly seize on divisive issues, from immigration to abortion to Israel’s war in Gaza, to exacerbate discord among Americans. And they’ve all experimented with using AI to churn out more misleading content.

Sponsor Message

“Our adversaries know that misinformation and disinformation is cheap and effective,” said Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., who chairs the Senate intelligence committee, in an interview with NPR.

The federal government moved quickly to publicly attribute the fake Pennsylvania ballot video to Russia the day after the video first appeared on X — a notably rapid turnaround for intelligence and law enforcement officials. And they warned they expect more such fakes in the coming days and weeks.

In September, the Justice Department seized web domains it says Russian operatives used to spoof American news outlets and spread fake stories, indicted employees of Kremlin-backed broadcaster RT in a scheme to fund right-wing pro-Trump American influencers, and brought criminal charges against Iranian hackers accused of targeting the Trump campaign.

DHS’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the FBI have issued joint public service announcements alerting Americans to tactics foreign actors might use to discredit the election, including ransomware attacks or falsely claiming to have hacked voter registration systems.

Officials say, so far, there’s no sign that foreign adversaries have breached any election or voting systems. But attackers don’t have to succeed in order to undermine confidence, Conley, the election security expert, said.

“While these things like a [distributed denial of service] attack or ransomware could be disruptive to the elections process, it's not going to undermine the security or integrity of the vote casting or counting process,” Conley said. “But our adversaries may try to convince the American people otherwise.”

At all levels of government, the message is consistent: Turn to the people running local elections for authoritative voting information.

“What we are really trying to encourage them to do is to know that it is your state and local election official that is the signal through that noise,” Conley said.

And local election officials are making more of an effort than ever before to seek out media attention and educate the public on their processes. State election officials in a number of swing states have started holding multiple press conferences per week leading up to Nov. 5.

Sponsor Message

“It's really important for us to get the message out there first and be as proactive as possible,” said Isaac Cramer, who runs elections in Charleston County, S.C.



Partisan and splintered realities

The very subject of election “disinformation” itself has been turned into a partisan fight. A coordinated Republican legal and political campaign to cast efforts to mitigate or track the spread of falsehoods online as “censorship” has undercut the work of government agencies, online platforms and researchers, and driven one institution out of the field.

Last month, Warner wrote an open letter urging CISA to do more to help state and local governments identify and respond to election misinformation and disinformation campaigns, and to coordinate communications between the government, tech companies and researchers.

“The government needs to get this information out as quickly as possible, because literally the stakes are nothing less than our democracy,” Warner told NPR.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

Cramer, the election official in South Carolina, said one challenge for local governments dealing with false information online is how splintered the internet is. He’s recently started seeing a lot more wrong voting information on NextDoor, for instance.

“We can't possibly have eyes on every platform and see everything that is being posted,” Cramer said.

Increasingly election officials are thinking outside the box to reach voters, because trying to fight fire with fire on social media has felt like a losing battle for years now, says Carolina Lopez, a former election official from Miami-Dade County, Fla.

“Election officers around the country spend a whole lot of time producing content for social media, and it always kills me when I see, like, three likes and it's usually themselves, their [spokesperson] and their mom,” said Lopez, who now runs the Partnership for Large Election Jurisdictions. “Election officials are trying to figure out, ‘Well, what else can I do to be heard?’”

Sponsor Message

In Montgomery County, Pa., Neil Makhija fashioned a voting ice cream truck to travel his county and help people vote. Cramer, in Charleston County, co-wrote a children’s book. Derek Bowens, in Durham County, N.C., created an app that could deliver accurate election information directly to people there.



The world’s richest man’s megaphone

One of the loudest voices elevating unverified rumors and outright falsehoods about the 2024 election also controls a major communications platform. Musk, the world’s richest man, took control of Twitter two years ago and has remade the site, now called X, into a pro-Trump megaphone.

Musk has become a major vector for baseless claims that Democrats are bringing in immigrants to illegally vote for them — a conspiracy theory Trump and other Republicans have embraced and are using to lay the groundwork to claim the election was stolen should he lose.

When election officials try to correct Musk’s false claims, he has lashed out. Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson told CBS News that she and her staff received threats and harassing messages after Musk called her a liar when she fact-checked his claim that the state has more registered voters than eligible citizens.

Musk has also shared AI-generated content on X without disclosure, including images and videos of Harris doing and saying things she didn’t.

Musk’s America PAC is inviting users to share “potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities” on an “Election Integrity Community” on X that has more than 40,000 members. The feed is filled with allegations that voting machines are switching votes from Trump to Harris and posts casting doubt on the security of mail-in ballots — both frequently debunked narratives in 2020 — as well as copies of the fake Bucks County video.

Danielle Lee Tomson, research manager at the University of Washington’s Center for an Informed Public, said such “evidence generation infrastructure” is more robust this year. Even when these efforts identify real issues with voting, they tend to ignore the checks in the system that catch problems, she said.

Sponsor Message

“If you see something seemingly suspicious, and then you take a picture of it and post it online, that can be decontextualized so quickly and not take into account all of the various remedies or the fact that there's nothing suspicious there at all,” she said.

Local election officials are making their processes more transparent than ever this year, including livestreaming counting facilities, and welcoming record numbers of election monitors. But such openness is a double-edged sword: Video feeds provide more material for content creators who may use it to push their own narratives of malfeasance — such as the false claims against Georgia election workers amplified by Trump in 2020. That leaves officials operating with the knowledge that their every move will be scrutinized.

“We try to not commit unforced errors,” said Stephen Richer, the Republican recorder in Maricopa County, Ariz., who has been an outspoken debunker of election lies. “But at the end of the day, if somebody really wants to make something look weird, I think they can do it, unfortunately.”



Social media steps back

In 2020, major social media platforms proactively boosted election officials as authoritative sources of information, made misleading posts about voting less visible, and added warning labels to false claims. Now, Musk has cut most of X’s team policing the platform and removed many guardrails against false and misleading content.

X is the most glaring example, but other platforms have also backed away from the more aggressive stance they took in 2020, cut back on the number of people working on trust and safety, and are generally more quiet about the work they are doing. Meta now lets Facebook and Instagram users opt out of some features of its fact-checking program, while its text-based social network, Threads, has deemphasized news and politics.

Warner told NPR he’s concerned social media platforms have stepped back at a time when threats, including from AI-generated content, are more urgent.

Sponsor Message

“Think about the devastating effect it’d have if somebody uses an AI image of what looks like an election official somehow destroying ballots or, you know, breaking into a drop box,” he said. “That kind of imagery could literally spark violence in a close election after the fact and again undermine Americans’ confidence in our system.”

In the face of that landscape, election officials say they are controlling what they can control. They have spent countless hours reaching out to skeptical voters over the past four years, and they’re now clinging onto hope that work will make a difference in people's willingness to accept election results.

Michael Adams, the Republican secretary of state of Kentucky, is hoping the novelty of election denial will start wearing off as well.

“For a while there, every six months, they'd come up with a new conspiracy theory. It would be debunked. They'd have egg on their face. They go back in their hole for six months and then come back,” Adams said. “You only get so many bites at that apple.”
covers politics and society for Vox. She first joined Vox in 2019, and her work has also appeared in Politico, Washington Monthly, and the New Republic.

US Democratic Rep. Colin Allred speaks during a campaign rally for US Vice President and Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris at Shell Energy Stadium in Houston, Texas, on October 25, 2024. Miguel J. Rodriguez Carrillo/AFP via Getty Images

It’s election o’clock, and that means there is, once again, chatter about Texas going blue. Democrats haven’t won statewide since 1994, but now, they’re pinning their hopes on Rep. Colin Allred, who is challenging incumbent Republican Sen. Ted Cruz.

Cruz leads Allred by between 1 and 7 percentage points in recent polling, though Allred has outpaced Cruz in fundraising. Together, the two campaigns and outside groups have raised $144 million so far, making it the most expensive Senate race this year.

If Allred wins, it would be the kind of massive upset that former Democratic Rep. Beto O’Rourke nearly pulled off in his own Senate bid against Cruz in 2018, the closest statewide race in 40 years. But Allred, who began the race as a relatively unknown character, is running a different kind of campaign from O’Rourke — one that will test a theory of how Democrats can win, or at least get even closer to winning, in Texas.

James Henson, director of the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas Austin, thinks 2024 probably won’t be the year the state flips. “We’ve not seen any signs in the polling of there being a breakthrough this year,” he said.

Still, Democrats are playing offense in Texas more than they have in the past. On Friday, Vice President Kamala Harris visited the state, something no Democratic presidential candidate has done this close to an election since President Bill Clinton in 1996. The national party has also poured $13 million into advertising, with reportedly millions more to come in the final stretch before Election Day. With Texas being one of few competitive Senate races this year, Democrats are seeking to leave it all on the table.

If Allred even comes close to a victory, however, there will be a postmortem examining what he did right to keep the margins narrow. That might inform how Democrats seek to compete in a solidly red state, but where Republicans aren’t winning by as much as they used to.

“What we see broadly is a continual tightening of political margins in the state dating back to 2004,” said Luke Warford, a former Democratic statewide candidate for Railroad Commission and founder of the Agave Democratic Infrastructure Fund, a Democratic PAC aimed at off-cycle investment in Texas. “I think investing here matters because it’s part of a longer-term effort to make Texas competitive.”

Allred’s theory of how Democrats can succeed in Texas

Allred, a former NFL player, has emphasized his credentials as one of the most bipartisan members of the House in a seat he won in 2018 from longtime Republican Rep. Pete Sessions. And he has sought to distance himself from the national political fight between former President Donald Trump and Harris.

Warford said Allred’s campaign has a “very clear theory of the case of what it’s going to take to win: leaning into what it means to not be a national Democrat, but a Texas Democrat, and to really prosecute the case against Ted Cruz and his record.”

That has notably involved hitting hard against Cruz in a recent debate and in political ads on the subject of abortion, which Texas has banned after six weeks of pregnancy even in cases of rape or incest. Though he describes himself as “pro-life,” Cruz has been reluctant to elaborate on his stance on abortion, saying during the debate that states should decide whether to implement rape or incest exceptions to abortion bans.

Allred, for his part, asked Cruz to answer for the “26,000 Texas women who’ve been forced to give birth to their rapist’s child under this law that you called perfectly reasonable,” adding he “trusts Texas women to make their own health care decisions.”

In contrast to O’Rourke, who famously visited all 254 of Texas’s sprawling counties during his 2018 Senate bid, Allred is taking a more targeted approach to voter outreach. He’s been holding events in major cities and suburbs and courting moderate voters, rather than seeking to fire up the base.

This has proved controversial among some party operatives, who think Allred’s campaign has been too quiet and abandoned tried-and-true tactics that allowed them to come so close with O’Rourke. But defenders of Allred’s strategy say it’s a different game in a presidential election year, where base voters are more likely to turn out. O’Rourke also failed to make much headway in rural areas of the state, suggesting that Allred’s time is better spent trying to persuade and turn out gettable voters.

“Folks can say that that theory is right or wrong,” Warford said. “We’re going to get some really interesting data back about if that approach works. We haven’t won before. So I think taking a slightly different tack makes a lot of sense for them.”

Why a close race in Texas is meaningful for Democrats

If Allred wins or comes close to winning, it wouldn’t just be an aberration.

There’s a perception that Cruz is uniquely beatable because he’s hateable — more so than Texas Sen. John Cornyn, who is up for reelection in 2026. While even Cruz’s Republican Senate colleagues have pointed out a certain disdain for Cruz, he’s not actually that unpopular in Texas. Among Republicans, his approval ratings range between the high 70s to 80s. By comparison, Cornyn’s have recently ranged from the 40s to low 50s. Cruz’s and Cornyn’s approval ratings among independents are similar. In a red state, that should be enough for Cruz to handily win reelection.

“His job approval numbers are in the top tier of job approval numbers of the most well-known Republican state officials among Republicans,” Henson said. “And so he has a pretty firm hold on the traditional base that Republicans need to win in the state under normal circumstances.” The fact that the race is close suggests that playing just to Republican voters may no longer be a strategy by which a candidate can win by a comfortable margin in Texas. The campaign Cruz has run this year reflects that: For instance, he aired ads featuring “Democrats for Cruz” personalities like Harris County District Attorney Kim Ogg.

“The campaign felt they needed to soften his image and moderate it,” Henson said. “The standard playbook is you run far to the right in the primary, and then you tack maybe a little toward the middle, but not to the point where you know you’re going around telling people, ‘Hey, look, I worked with Democrats.’”

For Democrats, this marks a continuation of a trend that has been ongoing for years. The Republican margin of victory in the state has been tightening in recent presidential elections: Sen. Mitt Romney won Texas by 14 points in 2012, and Trump won by less than 9 points in 2016 and then by less than six in 2020. That suggests, especially in presidential election years where more Democrats tend to turn out, “the buffer for Republicans is changing,” Henson said.

So, do Democrats dare hope?

The Texas electorate may not be as red as it was a decade ago. But whether that’s enough to get Allred over the hill this year remains to be seen.

While some polls show him in a dead heat with Cruz, he’s barely within striking distance in others. Harris’s visit also seems to be designed to showcase the reality of Republican governance for an audience of swing-state voters, more than an attempt to win votes in Texas.

Still, Allred’s campaign appears to continue the trend of Texas becoming a more competitive state, Henson said. Democrat Wendy Davis lost by more than 20 points when she ran for governor in 2014, and O’Rourke lost by less than three points in 2018 and by 11 points in his 2022 bid for governor.

Warford said Democrats need to think about how to build out their infrastructure in Texas now in order to be competitive for future cycles. If Democrats can eventually make it a true battleground, that would put 40 electoral votes in play, blowing open new paths to 270. Even if Allred wins, the work will not be over, he said.

“I think it’s incumbent on Texans to wake up the day after the election, or once we know the results, and really continue to build and continue the momentum going forward,” he said. “Colin Allred is an NFL player, so I’ll use a football analogy: Championships are won in the offseason.”

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
is a senior correspondent at Vox. He covers a wide range of political and policy issues with a special focus on questions that internally divide the American left and right. Before coming to Vox in 2024, he wrote a column on politics and economics for New York Magazine.

As Election Day draws near, Kamala Harris’ message has shifted from conventional political issues to focusing on Donald Trump’s authoritarianism. Getty Images

Meanwhile, Trump’s allies and running mate have touted plans to purge much of the civil service of disloyal elements, bend federal law enforcement to his will, and nullify any court decisions that get in their way.

The Election, Explained A pop-up newsletter explaining the 2024 election — the candidates, the issues that matter most, and how it will all impact your life. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

All this represents a departure for Harris, who had focused more on conventional political issues — such as abortion and taxation — earlier in the campaign. Many Democrats believe her new message is a mistake — and they’re plausibly right.

To be sure, their case is counterintuitive: Common sense dictates that, when running against a Hitler-admiring authoritarian, it’s wise to emphasize that your opponent is a Hitler-admiring authoritarian.

But judging by the available data, swing voters are largely unmoved by such assertions, however objectively true and important they may be. Specifically, recent research by political scientists and pollsters suggest that undecided voters are less responsive to negative messages about Trump’s authoritarianism than positive ones about Harris’s economic agenda.

This shouldn’t be entirely surprising. In the wake of historic inflation, the threat of higher household costs is far more tangible to ordinary Americans than that of authoritarianism. According to Gallup’s polling, the economy is the electorate’s top issue this year.

This said, Harris’s closing argument remains defensible — but only if her warnings about Trump’s authoritarianism complement her economic message, rather than overshadowing it.

The case against the case against Trump’s fascism

The theory for why Harris should focus on bread-and-butter issues instead of Trump’s autocratic ambitions is simple: Nine years after Trump launched his first presidential campaign, voters already know what they think about him. And if undecided voters still aren’t convinced that Trump is an authoritarian menace, they probably can’t be persuaded on that point.

After all, Trump-curious voters remember Democrats issuing apocalyptic warnings in 2016, yet did not personally suffer nor witness any political repression during his time in office. To the contrary, they tend to recall life under Trump as utterly normal — at least, before the pandemic for which, in their view, he had little responsibility.

For such voters, this theory goes, claims about Trump’s “fascism” just sound like more of the overheated invective that have made our politics so toxic and divisive. They simply aren’t interested in debates over Trump’s character — what they care about are the election’s implications for their own finances.

On the other hand, these Americans know relatively little about Harris or her economic plans. And they don’t know much about the downsides of Trump’s policy agenda, which command less attention from cable news networks than his incendiary rhetoric and personal scandals.

Therefore, the way to maximize Harris’s support is to focus the public’s attention on how she would materially help ordinary Americans — and how Trump would materially harm them.

This theory is buttressed by recent political science research, messaging testing, and survey data.

Earlier this year, the political scientists David Broockman and Joshua Kalla conducted an experiment to determine the Harris campaign’s most effective message. They recruited 100,000 survey respondents — a far larger sample than a typical poll — and randomly assigned them to watch one of 76 campaign advertisements of their own invention. Then, they asked the respondents how they would vote.

Broockman and Kalla found that Harris did best when voters were exposed to messages concerning pocketbook issues. In fact, the five highest-performing ads in their test focused on Harris’s support for Social Security, Medicare, Covid-19 relief spending, a minimum wage hike, and reducing the cost-of-living, respectively. By contrast, an attack ad centered on Trump’s threat to democracy was the 27th most effective message.

These results might surprise politically engaged readers: If Trump’s authoritarianism is old news, how could the Democratic Party’s support for Social Security not be the same?

Yet in a survey taken by Broockman and Kalla earlier this year, half of respondents did not know Harris opposes cutting Social Security benefits, while a third were unaware she wants to raise taxes on the rich and corporations.

The largest super PAC aiding Harris’s candidacy, Future Forward, has replicated Broockman and Kalla’s basic finding. According to an email obtained by the New York Times, the PAC’s message tests have found that “purely negative attacks on Trump’s character are less effective than contrast messages that include positive details about Kamala Harris’s plans to address the needs of everyday Americans.”

Survey experiments conducted last week by the Democratic data firm Blue Rose Research — in partnership with the Campaign for a Family Friendly Economy PAC — yielded the same conclusion. In their tests, Blue Rose asked respondents how they intended to vote, then showed them one of 30 Democratic messages, and asked them about their voting intentions a second time. The highest-performing message, which produced a 1.2 percentage point increase in Harris’s support after voters were exposed to it, went like this:

This election is a choice between two different visions for America. Harris will take on price gouging to bring down grocery prices and lower the cost of health insurance. Trump wants to cut taxes for the wealthy. Harris wants to cut taxes for the middle class. You may not always agree with her but she will lift up the middle class and be a President for all Americans.

By contrast, one of the worst performing messages — which increased Harris’s support by only 0.3 percent — was as follows:

Trump’s own White House Chief of Staff, a former 4-star General, said in an interview on October 22nd that he agreed with many of Trump’s policies but still does not want him to become President again. The General said quote “he’s certainly an authoritarian, admires people who are dictators. So he certainly falls into the general definition of fascist, for sure.”

Notably, on this point, Democratic super PACs and Democratic socialists see eye to eye: The Center for Working-Class Politics, a think-tank founded by socialists, partnered with the market research firm YouGov to run different messages by Pennsylvania voters in late September and early October. They found that an economically focused, populist narrative was the most popular message, while a narrative emphasizing Trump’s threat to democracy was the least popular.

Spotlighting Trump’s authoritarianism performed especially poorly with blue-collar workers, and best with educated professionals (though even the latter group preferred the populist narrative). That’s potentially significant, since the key Rust Belt battlegrounds — Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin — are all less college-educated than the nation as a whole.

The case for Harris’s closing message

Nevertheless, there is still a reasonable case for Harris’s current strategy.

It case begins with the observation that Harris has not abandoned populist, bread-and-butter messaging. She is still airing ads touting her middle-class tax cut proposal, while spotlighting Trump’s plans for slashing taxes on billionaires.

And the two most heavily funded campaign ads during the first three weeks of October were both economic appeals from Harris’s top super PAC.

Thus, the question is not whether Harris should tell voters about her plans for the economy or Trump’s aspirations for a dictatorship. No one believes that focusing exclusively on the latter is a good idea.

Rather, the question is whether Harris should complement her populist messaging with warnings about Trump’s fascist instincts — or put every available resource towards making the case for herself on normal political issues, such as the economy and abortion.

The argument for the first option is potentially compatible with the message testing cited above: Even if the best message for most undecided voters is an economic one, warnings about Trump’s authoritarianism could still be the best argument for a pivotal subset of that group.

Let’s say that 15 percent of undecided voters are longtime Republicans who favor conservative economic policy but don’t like Trump. Ads focused on Harris’s fiscal agenda will do nothing to sway this group. But telling them that many former Trump administration officials believe the Republican nominee is a would-be dictator — and that conservatives like Liz and Dick Cheney are supporting Harris for this reason — could conceivably help them to reconcile a Harris vote with their Republican identities.

To be sure, most undecided voters care more about Harris’s support for Social Security than Liz Cheney’s support for her. But there’s some evidence that a few might feel the opposite. Indeed, one Democratic pollster has actually found anti-Trump, pro-democracy arguments performing well. In a survey experiment earlier this month, Blueprint found that Harris’s most effective closing argument was:

Nearly half of Donald Trump’s Cabinet have refused to endorse him. When Trump learned during the Capitol riot that his supporters were threatening to kill his own vice president, he said, ‘So what?’ and refused to do anything to ensure the vice president was safe. Republican governors, senators, and House members have all said the same thing: We can’t give Trump another four years as president.

Blue Rose Research tried and failed to replicate this finding. And it goes against most of the available evidence. In fact, in a subsequent poll of swing voters in swing states, Blueprint itself found economic messages outperforming ones focused on democracy.

Still, highlighting Never Trump Republicans’ concerns about his authoritarianism did work with one sample of voters. And that lends some credence to the idea that a small — but potentially significant — minority of undecideds are anti-insurrection conservatives. Given that this election is historically close, even tiny voting blocs could matter.

There is one other argument for Harris to devote significant time and money to spotlighting Trump’s fascistic tendencies: Cable news networks are never going to devote a lot of airtime to the economic implications of Trump’s agenda, which are neither especially newsy nor sensational. A detailed analysis of the impact of Trump’s tariffs on consumer prices probably won’t make for good television, but the Republican nominee calling for the military to crack down on “the enemy from within” does.

Thus, if Harris wants to keep the media focused on Trump’s vulnerabilities — and fill up airtime that might otherwise go toward subjects unfavorable for the Democratic Party — she might be wise to amplify her opponent’s most authoritarian remarks, or the most alarming revelations from former Trump White House officials.

Considering the empirical evidence favoring economic messaging, however, Harris would still be well-advised to err on the side of an excessive focus on bread-and-butter issues.

The responsible message is the one that works

Some may feel that Harris has an ethical duty to sound the alarm about her rival’s contempt for liberal democracy, irrespective of what message tests say. After all, the American people deserve to know Trump considered having protesters shot amid 2020’s anti-police violence demonstrations, he plans to sic the Department of Justice on his political opponents, and many of his former aides fear he would be completely unconstrained in a second term.

I sympathize with this sentiment. But responsibility for informing the public lies with the media. Harris’s job is to win. If that requires speaking less about the threat of fascism than the risk of higher grocery prices, so be it. Loudly condemning authoritarianism is good, soundly defeating it is better.
This is the third time Donald Trump has run for president as a major-party candidate, and yet, this cycle, the American electorate and the American press seem unable to fully comprehend the choice we are facing.* It is not, as we’ve been trained to think, a contest between an extreme Republican and a middle-of-the-road Democrat. There is still no language that conveys what the stakes really are. This election is not about politics; it’s much more basic—it’s about how the American determines what is real. Will the future of the country be based on evidence and law, or will government be twisted to reflect whatever Donald Trump tells us is true?

It reminds me of a series of phone calls I started receiving, when I was a teenager, from women I didn’t know. They were all looking for a man named Steven Reisner, whom they had been dating; somehow, none of them had ever gotten his phone number, so they had found me in the phone book. It turned out that, invariably, after a few dates, this other Steven Reisner had borrowed money from them, then disappeared. I remember one particularly plaintive voice on the phone: “Steven, why are you lying to me? What have I done wrong?” Try as I might, I couldn’t convince her that it wasn’t me. “Does this mean our engagement is off?” she asked me.

Since those calls, I have come to realize that those women simply did not understand that they had been dating a sociopath. That’s because people who are not sociopathic just can’t believe that pure sociopathy exists. They can recognize that they are being lied to, even being manipulated, but still they believe that somewhere inside the sociopath there is a human being like they are, perhaps a hurting soul gone astray. Psychologists, too, make this mistake, believing that sociopaths are not strategic but, rather, mentally ill, because they were traumatized in childhood. It’s extremely difficult for decent people to accept that there are some people who simply do not share their values about truth and basic human kindness. This is what the sociopath counts on.

Advertisement

Democrats in particular suffer from this neurosis; they are regularly surprised and outraged with each new iteration of Trump’s lies and cruelty, reacting not unlike the women who used to call me on the phone. They just can’t believe that someone could be so brazenly deceptive and selfish and get away with it. Over and over again. Politics has always been a tough game, Democrats think, but even Dick Cheney believes in the rules. These rules can be stretched, but ultimately, they continue to tell themselves, the system will persevere, right?

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

To my ears, it sounds the same as “Does this mean our engagement is off?”

We are now at the eleventh hour. The Republicans, under the brilliant tutelage of Donald Trump, have become the Party of Sociopaths, and their aim is to relegate the Democrats to a Party of Hapless Neurotics. The fateful question is, will the Democrats and the mainstream press continue to waste their energy being shocked, or will they change their strategy? It all boils down to this: How will the American voter assess what is true?

Advertisement

For Republicans (and Fox News), truth no longer has anything to do with facts, or even reality. Truth has returned to its pre-enlightenment meaning; or, as Merriam-Webster puts it, its archaic meaning: “Fidelity, constancy.” To be true, in the medieval Trumpian world, is to be loyal and steadfast. It’s no longer about reason or even belief: It’s about faith. Freud had a word for this kind of primitive faith; he called it illusion. People crave a godlike father figure, Freud explained, especially when they feel threatened with the eruption of two dangers: “the crushingly superior force of nature … and the shortcomings of society which have made themselves painfully felt.” In the 21st century, facing severe social inequities just when nature seems most out of control, America is in exactly that vulnerable state. And so it shouldn’t actually surprise us that nearly half the country’s voters have rallied around a sociopathic strongman who promises protection in return for absolute fealty.

Advertisement

Related From Slate Psychologists Can’t Stop Diagnosing Trump Because He’s Puzzling in a Totally New Way Read More

The Democrats and the mainstream press completely miss the big picture; they think they can combat this alternative reality by zeroing in on Trump’s lies. “Fact checking” has become the self-soothing fantasy of a neurotic press—useless because the real issue is that Trump and his followers live in a completely separate reality. There is no fact-checking exercise that could get us to a common ground because in Trump’s reality, and the reality of nearly half the country, whatever helps the sociopath score points against the Democrats is the truth.

Advertisement

If the Democrats are to get through this, they must take the neurotic gloves off and focus on one goal: forcing Democrats and Republicans alike to see that the Trump reality is leading the country off a cliff and that the only one with a parachute is Trump. Every speech and appearance, every TV ad and interview, every remaining moment of the campaign and afterward, when the Trump armies fight the results, must be devoted to the fact that Trump is trying to rewrite the rules by which we all live so that instead of democracy, we have a Church of Trump. He does not hide this—he has said clearly and repeatedly that his aim is to dismantle the rule of law, arrest his enemies, bring the army to police our streets, shut down the free press, and empower local armed militias to terrify anyone who stands in his way. We just refuse to believe that he will really act that way.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Kamala Harris has finally begun to call out the extreme danger of the Trumpian reality, but she also can’t help herself; she still normalizes him by labeling his statements unhinged, rather than strategic. The press neurotically follows suit, putting ironic scare quotes around his political plans: “Trump Escalates Threats to Political Opponents He Deems the ‘Enemy’ ” reads a headline in the New York Times. But Trump is not threatening an imaginary “enemy”; he is making plans to jail enemies and has already begun to name people included on the list. He has already worked out how he will use the National Guard and the larger military to silence and jail anyone he deems a threat to his power.

We can laugh along with late-night TV and leading Democrats about Trump’s dancing, just as we can call how the press is normalizing Trump’s statements “sanewashing.” But these responses are best understood as symptoms of our national neurotic delusion: the delusion that no one can really be that evil; the delusion that our system will prevent him from doing what he says he will do; the delusion that sociopaths don’t really exist. But sociopaths do exist—and in American society they become billionaires. Or they become president. Or both.

The only way to stop him is to act as if Trump does have a plan, and is deadly serious about all of it. Only we can call this engagement off.
What are Trump’s final rally speeches like? Lower energy, less focused and running late

toggle caption Christian Monterrosa/AFP via Getty Images

There are many recurring characters at former president Donald Trump’s rallies, and the shoutout he gave a traveling group of female superfans at a Greensboro, N.C., rally last week was no different.

Until he messed up their nickname.

“And we have our’ Front Row Jacks’ ... we have ‘Front Row Jacks and Joes,’ thank you very much,” he said about the women that call themselves “Front Row Joes” and attend seemingly every public event he does. “What happened, you’re not in the front row? Whoa!”

Sponsor Message

When ad-libbing about a visit to a McDonald’s where he served food to supporters in a campaign stunt meant to attack Vice President Harris, he couldn’t remember the word fryer.

“And those French fries were good, they were great,” he said. “They were right out of the ... they were right out of whatever the hell they may come out of.”

In Prescott Valley, Ariz., an attempt to recognize a group of Assyrian supporters went seriously awry when he welcomed what sounded like “Azur-Asians.”

These gaffes aren’t isolated events, but are more emblematic of the final weeks of this election on the trail with Trump, who at 78 years old would be the oldest person ever elected president if he wins next week.

toggle caption Angela Weiss/AFP via Getty Images

In some ways, though, his closing message isn’t all that different from his first trip down the golden escalator nearly a decade ago.

"When do we beat Mexico at the border? They’re laughing at us, at our stupidity,” he said in 2015. “And now they are beating us economically. They are not our friend, believe me. But they’re killing us economically. The U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else’s problems.”

In the discography of Donald Trump, his 2016 campaign topped the charts with concerns over immigration. Today, he still plays his greatest hits, like at that speech in Tempe, where he once again called the U.S. a “dumping ground” for migrants from other countries.

“We're a dumping ground,” he said on Oct 24, 2024. “We're like a ... we're like a garbage can for the world. That's what's happened. That's what's happened to — We're like a garbage can.”

Now in the final days of campaign No. 3, Trump often abruptly jumps from remarks on a teleprompter to nonsensical tangents back to his prepared speech.

In a marathon three-hour interview with podcaster Joe Rogan, Trump touted the oratorical method as a quote “weave” that’s not for everyone.

“I like to give a long — the weave,” Trump said on The Joe Rogan Experience. “But when you do the weaves, and you have to be very smart to do weaves, when you do the weave, look at this, just in this one thing, we’re talking about little pieces.”

“Gotta get it back home,” Rogan interjected.

Sponsor Message

“No, no, it comes back home for the right people,” Trump continued. “For the wrong people, it doesn't come back home and they end up in the wilderness, right?”

Trump’s attacks have become increasingly profane

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images/Getty Images North America

Over the summer, Trump had a hard time pivoting away from bashing President Biden after he dropped out. But lately, Trump has fallen into a familiar refrain of calling Harris stupid and low-IQ, and pushing back on criticism of his speeches by arguing none of her words make any sense.

“I have no cognitive,” he said in an Oct. 20 town hall in Lancaster, Pa. “She may have a cognitive problem, but there's no cognitive problem.”

Trump has always pushed the envelope of acceptable speech from a politician, but in recent weeks he’s become more vulgar in his anecdotes and attacks.

"We can't stand you,” he said of Harris in Latrobe, Pa. “You're a sh** vice president ... The worst. You're the worst vice president. Kamala, you're fired. Get the hell out of here!”

And while Trump's final weeks could serve as a farewell tour to campaigning, he's also occasionally told his supporters it’s time to face the music about what might come next.

“If you don't win, win, win, we've all had a good time, but it's not going to matter, right?” he said. “Sadly, because what we've done is amazing: Three nominations in a row. What we've done, we've got to win.”

“If we don't win, it's like it was all it was all for ... not very much. We can't — we can't let that happen.”

toggle caption Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images

It’s a tight race that has required multiple, lengthy events in a day, and the fatigue can be heard in his voice.

In many ways, the Donald Trump of 2016, 2020 and even earlier this year, who promised to “Make America Great Again,” is not the same Donald Trump who stands before voters when the curtains close on this election in November 2024.
The Washington Post has reportedly lost a stunning 10% of its subscriptions after its Friday announcement that, for the first time in decades, it would not be endorsing a presidential candidate for the election. The Post, in an apparent attempt to stop the bleeding, on Monday published an essay by the paper’s billionaire owner, Jeff Bezos, attempting to explain his decision.

According to the Post’s own reporting, citing interviews with people briefed on the decision, Bezos refused to publish the endorsement of Vice President Kamala Harris that the Post’s editorial board had written. (Bezos is the founder of commercial giant Amazon and the space company Blue Origin, both of which have contracts with the federal government.) Instead of a mea culpa about inappropriate meddling, Bezos in his essay offered a tour de force of nonsense that only makes him look even worse.

Bezos offered a tour de force of nonsense that only makes him look even worse.

Bezos contends that ending presidential endorsements is key to the mission of restoring the public’s trust in newsrooms. (Gallingly, Bezos refers to journalism as “our profession,” when he’s not a professional journalist, but one of the richest men in the world who bought a media outlet.) Here’s his core argument:

Presidential endorsements do nothing to tip the scales of an election. No undecided voters in Pennsylvania are going to say, “I’m going with Newspaper A’s endorsement.” None. What presidential endorsements actually do is create a perception of bias. A perception of non-independence. Ending them is a principled decision, and it’s the right one.

It’s a strange argument. Either a newspaper’s position matters or it doesn’t. How can an endorsement simultaneously affect how the public views a paper’s coverage and also have zero effect on voter thinking? In addition to his argument being contradictory, Bezos’ claim that endorsements are pointless is empirically wrong; political scientists have found that some newspaper endorsements, particularly when they’re surprising, can have a measurable effect on voters’ views of candidates.

Nothing about Bezos' intervention inspires confidence that the principle of newsroom independence was what was important.

Viewed through the prism of whether endorsements matter, endorsing Harris would be consistent with the Post’s stated allegiance to defending democracy. The Post could endorse Harris on the basis of loyalty to democracy, not the Democratic Party, and trust that the pro-democracy “bias” that the endorsement would betray is appropriate.

But, for the sake of argument, let’s say that editorials do create a perception of bias. That argument is, in the abstract, not without merit. At a newspaper, the reporters are supposed to dispassionately share factual information and analysis, and at many of those papers, a roster of opinion writers offer their personal opinions. Newspaper editorials sit awkwardly astride this bifurcation, offering the institution’s official opinions, and yet somehow the work of its reporters is expected to not be influenced. Philosophically, I think scrapping newsroom editorials — or at the very least, official candidate endorsements — makes plenty sense.

Yet nothing about Bezos’ intervention inspires confidence that the principle of newsroom independence was what was important to him. In fact, Bezos’ maneuvering had the opposite effect. The billionaire owner reportedly overrode his own editorial staff — days out from a high-stakes election in which the beneficiary of his move, former President Donald Trump, could easily win. And the paper announced that it wouldn’t endorse for president the same day a chief executive of Blue Origin met with Trump.

In his piece, Bezos claims the Trump meeting was coincidental and that his last-minute involvement was the result of his and the Post’s “inadequate planning.” That’s not good enough. In order for a decision not to endorse in presidential elections to not come across as meddling, Bezos would have had to have made it outside the election season. There is no way to disentangle his endorsement maneuvering from his potential concern about Trump’s reputation for favoritism and vindictiveness. And unless Bezos makes some kind of serious effort to create a firewall between him and the paper’s editorial policy, then he has set a precedent for meddling that nobody at the Post — or any of its readers — will forget.

As the top reader comment in response to Bezos’ essay put it: “Many of us trusted the Washington Post because we believed it operated independent of your personal editorial interference. Stop lecturing us about a problem you created.”

Taking a step back, Bezos’ actions highlight a structural problem. Even if he had pushed for a change in endorsement policy quietly in the off-season as a way to shield his businesses, that would still be a problem. The reality is that the independence of media outlets will always be at risk when they’re owned by billionaires or profit-seeking corporations.

Bezos’ ham-fisted move has generated a credibility crisis at his media outlet that no Harris endorsement could have ever had. He just definitively illustrated that the Post can only be as independent from his views as he wants it to be.
Democrats are vying for the support of rural voters in North Carolina

Enlarge this image toggle caption Andrea Ellen Reed Andrea Ellen Reed

Down Home North Carolina is a non-profit organization focused on rural communities. They say their platform is "survival" – helping poor and working class people get basic needs met like housing and education.



As Consider This host Scott Detrow witnessed while spending an afternoon with the group, they are committed to turning out every voter they can.



He and the Consider This team tagged along with Down Home NC Regional Field Director Adon Bermudez-Bey and other door-knockers, watching them spring into action when they met a registered voter who wasn't planning on casting a ballot this year.



Down Home NC volunteer Alex Cook started peppering him with questions about the issues he's facing in his life.



"You need health care, though, right? You get SSI, so you need your health care," Cook said.



"Yes I get SSI," replied Jakai Britton, the unaffiliated voter who was in his car, about to pull out of the driveway.



"So, do we have a vote from you?" Cook asked.



"Yeah, you got a vote from me," said Britton.



And that, according to Bermudez-Bey, was a sign of success: to get just one voter to go from driving away, to a conversation, and from a no to voting to a maybe – all in the span of just a couple minutes.

Sponsor Message

You're reading the Consider This newsletter, which unpacks one major news story each day. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to more from the Consider This podcast.

Vital rural Democrats

In an election season like this one, Down Home NC is mostly focused on local races, but they endorse candidates up and down the ticket – usually Democrats.



Most of their time is spent urging residents, especially residents of color, to get out and vote.



Nash County is in a rural part of this key swing state. It is near-evenly divided between white and Black residents, and in recent presidential elections, it was near-evenly divided by its results.



President Joe Biden won the county by two tenths of a point in 2020, and four years before that, former President Donald Trump won it by the exact same razor-thin margin.



Driving around the tiny town of Nashville, where the Down Home NC group was canvassing, it didn't feel that way, with plenty of Trump and MAGA signs all over.



Still, Bermudez-Bey and his team of volunteers found Democratic doors to knock on.



"What I noticed is that there's a lot of people [who] want to stay out [of] the way. They see the Trump signs. They see what's going on, in school boards, in the city council. They're just like, 'I'm going to stay out of it,'" said Bermudez-Bey.



"We're trying to tell them, there's an organization that specifically focuses in rural areas to pull those folks out."

Sponsor Message

Undecided voters

With two weeks to go before Election Day, finding a true undecided voter feels like a rarity. But the Down Home NC team says it meets them all the time.



The Consider This team encountered a few too, like Nashville resident Sean Jones, who said he planned to vote. He hadn't quite made up his mind on the presidential race, but said he's leaning toward Vice President Kamala Harris.



"I just recently went to go see my brother in prison this weekend, and he was kind of like on my head about it, like voting. He wanted me to vote for Trump," Jones said. "But I still wanted to vote for Kamala. So, I'm still trying to look into the politics as far as what's what and who's who."



Adon Bermudez-Bey, speaking only for himself and not for Down Home NC, told Consider This he's also still undecided – even as he led a group of canvassers for an organization that has endorsed Harris.



"I don't know if I'm voting for Kamala. Just full transparency. But I know that I'm definitely not voting for Trump."



Bermudez-Bey cited his concerns about Harris' time as a prosecutor in California, and her support for Israel during the ongoing war in the Middle East. He's set a deadline for himself: November 2nd, the last day of early voting in North Carolina, to decide between Harris or a third-party candidate.



But he said he still sees the merits of a Harris presidency – at least for Down Home NC's goals.



"No, it's not going to be perfect, but it's going to be a lot easier for us to organize under her presidency than Trump's."

This episode was produced by Kathryn Fink and Tyler Bartlam. It was edited by Ashley Brown. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
This is an adapted excerpt from the Oct. 28 episode of "Inside with Jen Psaki."

In the closing days of the election, Vice President Kamala Harris is trying to make the contrast between herself and former President Donald Trump as clear as she possibly can.

And she definitely offered quite a contrast with the headlines you may have seen from Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally on Sunday, which was basically six hours of racist, hate speech — with a brief interlude that included an awkward interaction between Melania Trump and her husband, exuding the level of warmth you might feel between two distant cousins who don’t particularly like hanging out at family gatherings.

This is yet another reminder, one week before the election, of exactly who Trump is.

But beyond that, the coverage of Trump’s rally has largely revolved around two things: First, a racist comedian who opened for the former president and said some truly vile things, targeting Latinos, calling Puerto Rico a floating island of garbage and mocking Black people, Jewish people and Palestinians. Overall, just really horrible stuff.

None of that should be surprising. Trump has built for himself quite a body of racist and xenophobic work over the years. It’s a good thing for the Harris team that Sunday night’s remarks have sparked a huge outcry but, as the vice president said on Monday, this is nothing new. Sure, it might’ve been more vivid but it’s yet another reminder, one week before the election, of exactly who Trump is.

Besides all the racism, the other big headline from Sunday’s rally was about a secret plan Trump said he has with his little buddy, Speaker of the House Mike Johnson.

They think they can close out this campaign on racism, fear and hate.

Now, when the two major takeaways from a six-hour-long big, closing message rally just over one week out from Election Day are about how racist you are and speculation about your secret plans to steal an election, it’s pretty clear you don’t have a whole lot else going for you.

At the end of the day, this is all very revealing about what Trump and his team are thinking right now. It tells us that they think they can win like this. They think they can close out this campaign on racism, fear and hate. They think that will work. But if that doesn’t work — then don’t worry, Trump has a secret plan with Johnson.

That is what Sunday’s rally told us: Hatred is the message and conspiring with Mike Johnson is the backup plan.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Arab and Muslim leaders in Michigan and around the country are mounting a last-minute push to convince their compatriots to vote for Vice President Kamala Harris on Election Day next week, despite Harris and President Joe Biden’s continued funding of the Israeli military’s invasions of Gaza and Lebanon.

The push, consisting of endorsements and public appearances, comes as polling continues to show a tight race in Michigan, where 300,000 residents of Middle Eastern descent could play a make-or-break role if the election is close enough.

Advertisement

Republicans, meanwhile, have wooed their own Muslim and Arab leaders and are seizing on Harris’ use of former Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) as a surrogate to muddy the waters on former President Donald Trump’s approach to the Middle East.

The highest-profile moment of the Democratic effort came on Monday night, when Assad Turfe, the deputy executive of Wayne County, Michigan, took the stage at Vice President Kamala Harris’ rally in Ann Arbor, Michigan. He had a difficult assignment: Create a permission structure for his fellow Arab and Muslim American Michiganders to get behind Harris.

“The past year has been unimaginable for so many people in my community. We are mourning loved ones who have died in Gaza and Lebanon,” Turfe said. “We are wondering when the suffering will finally stop. We are desperate for a president who sees us, who understands us and who will give voice to our pain and work to end this war once and for all.”

“And Ann Arbor, I’m here tonight because I know without a doubt that Kamala Harris is that leader!” he concluded.

Advertisement

Assad Turfe, deputy executive of Wayne County, Michigan, speaks at a campaign rally for Vice President Kamala Harris in Ann Arbor on Oct. 28. Carlos Osorio/Associated Press

Turfe, the highest-ranking Arab American elected official in the county that is home to the predominantly Arab American city of Dearborn, contrasted Harris’ stated commitment to pushing for a cease-fire in the Israel-Hamas and Israel-Hezbollah wars with Trump’s words of support for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, “Do what you have to do.”

Turfe’s remarks, a press conference in support of Harris featuring Arab-American leaders at the American Arab Chamber of Commerce on Sunday, and a string of other public endorsements all aim to take some of the air out of the high-profile Arab American and Muslim endorsements that Trump touted at a Saturday rally in the Detroit suburb of Novi.

It’s all part of the way that the war in Gaza, which has resulted in the deaths of more than 43,000 Palestinians, displaced nearly all of Gaza’s population, and sparked a malnutrition and public health crisis in the coastal enclave, has fractured the Democratic Party coalition that elected Biden in 2020 and is now threatening Harris’ prospects for victory in the key battleground state of Michigan.

It is difficult to recall a presidential election in which an overseas conflict in which the United States is not directly engaged in hostilities has played such an influential role in a presidential election.

Advertisement

The Israel-Hamas war, which began in response to the Palestinian group Hamas’ terror attack on Oct. 7, 2023, that killed nearly 1,200 Israelis, has prompted major human rights groups to accuse Israel of war crimes for, among other things, not permitting adequate humanitarian aid to enter the besieged territory. Earlier this month, France and Italy each imposed embargoes on arms sales to Israel, citing the need for a political solution to the escalating regional conflict.

But with the exception of a pause on one shipment of 2,000-pound bombs, Biden has refused to impose stricter conditions on U.S. military aid to Israel, let alone an arms embargo.

“Kamala is campaigning with Muslim-hating warmonger Liz Cheney, who wants to invade practically every Muslim country on the planet.” - Former President Donald Trump

Some Muslim and Arab Americans initially were hopeful that Harris would come out in favor of a tougher approach. But while she has expressed impassioned support for a cease-fire and sympathy for Palestinian deaths, she has not broken with Biden on the critical matter of unconditional military aid and weapons sales to Israel.

That stance cost Harris the endorsement of the Michigan-based Uncommitted movement, which had hoped to leverage its protest vote in the Democratic primaries for a policy concession.

Advertisement

The Israeli bombardment of Lebanon, which began in September, and a subsequent ground invasion to root out the Shia militia Hezbollah, has caused additional rancor in Arab American hubs like Dearborn and Dearborn Heights, where many residents hail from the southern Lebanon communities most affected by Israeli operations. Kamal Ahmed Jawad, a Dearborn resident and U.S. citizen, was killed in an Israeli airstrike while visiting Lebanon in early October; many other Michiganders have recounted losing family members to the Israeli bombardment.

Even as Trump has promised to impose even less restraint on Israel than Biden or Harris, the Arab American leaders rallying to his side have pointed to his promises to scale back the United States’ interventions in foreign conflicts.

Dearborn Heights Mayor Bill Bazzi, the first Arab American mayor of a city where one-third of the population is of Arab descent, suggested in a GOP press call last week that Israel’s invasion of Lebanon, which resulted in the destruction of a home his grandparents had built, was the reason for his endorsement of Trump.

Bazzi, who is officially nonpartisan, made his endorsement official onstage at Trump’s rally in Novi, Michigan, on Saturday. “When President Trump was president, there was peace. We didn’t have any issues. There was no wars,” Bazzi said. “He didn’t create wars. He was actually trying to withdraw our troops from overseas.”

In a subsequent conversation with HuffPost, Bazzi, a career veteran of the U.S. Marines, characterized himself as a conservative-leaning person who has voted for candidates from both parties. Bazzi said he came to the U.S. with his family in the late 1970s when Israel bombed his village, Bint Jbeil, as part of its operations against Palestinian militias in southern Lebanon.

Advertisement

Pressed on Trump’s pro-Israel record and criticism of Biden for being unduly hard on the Jewish state, Bazzi said a personal conversation with Trump, in which Trump affirmed his commitment to regional peace, had won him over.

“When you see him on TV, you don’t see that personal touch ― when he looks at you directly in the face and tells you how things are,” Bazzi said. “And I know he’s sincere with what he said.”

Donald Trump listens as Dearborn Heights, Michigan, Mayor Bill Bazzi speaks on Saturday. Bazzi, an immigrant from south Lebanon, claimed Trump brought "peace." DREW ANGERER/Getty Images

Bazzi declined to speak to HuffPost about issues other than foreign policy and his views on the relative leadership skills of Trump and Harris.

But skepticism of the LGBTQ+ movement may be driving the Arab and Muslim shift toward Trump as much as anything related to foreign policy. “We support Donald J. Trump for his commitment to promoting family values and protect[ing] our children’s well-being, especially when it comes to curriculums and schools,” said Imam Bilal Alzuhiry, who spoke onstage alongside other clerics at Trump’s rally.

Advertisement

Given what he calls Trump’s “contentless” promises of Middle East peace, James Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, dismissed the Trump endorsers’ focus on foreign policy as window dressing. “His people told them that he would oppose LGBTQ stuff in the schools,” said Zogby, who participated in the pro-Harris press conference at the American Arab Chamber of Commerce in Dearborn on Sunday. “That’s all it was, really.”

Those Muslim and Arab American endorsers of Harris’ bid, who are more explicit in their criticism of her policy toward Israel, have made a nuanced argument about the dangers of a second Trump term and the opportunity to get a fair hearing from Harris.

Yasmine Taeb, a human rights attorney who came to the U.S. as a refugee from Iran, emphasized Trump’s implementation of a travel ban on people from majority-Muslim countries during his presidency. As a newly elected senator in January 2017, Harris joined a demonstration Taeb helped organize against the ban in front of the White House.

“As someone who fled war and grew up undocumented, I care about fighting for immigrant rights, workers rights, a human rights-centered foreign policy, and making sure that we’re fighting for the most marginalized in our communities,” Taeb, a former member of the Democratic National Committee from Virginia, told HuffPost. “I believe that we can continue to fight for those issues under a Harris administration.”

“Trump’s closing message is that Palestinians want to kill us at 2 years old.” - Yasmine Taeb, Iranian-American human rights lawyer

Advertisement

Taeb and other pro-Palestinian Harris supporters described their disgust at the spectacle of Trump using Arab American endorsements to boost his bid, even as he and his allies continue to heap vitriol on Palestinians.

At Trump’s rally on Sunday at Madison Square Garden in Manhattan, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani warned, without evidence, that Harris wanted to let in more Palestinian refugees. “I don’t take a risk with people that are taught to kill Americans at 2,” he said.

“Trump’s closing message is that Palestinians want to kill us at 2 years old,” Taeb said. “The fact that he’s now exploiting our pain around Gaza for his own benefit … is ridiculous.”

Harris has made her boosters’ job somewhat more difficult by campaigning with former Rep. Liz Cheney and accepting the endorsement of her father, former Vice President Dick Cheney. The elder Cheney was an architect of the post-Sept. 11 wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and relentless surveillance and detention at home that drove Muslim Americans into the arms of Democrats; Liz Cheney is an interventionist foreign policy hawk in a similar mold.

The Wyoming Republican’s role as a Harris campaign surrogate aims to help Harris pick up Trump-skeptical Republicans and independents in the affluent suburbs. But Trump and his allies have cited the Cheneys’ endorsement in their pitch to Arab and Muslim American voters, claiming that Trump, not Harris, is the true antiwar candidate.

Advertisement

“Kamala is campaigning with Muslim-hating warmonger Liz Cheney, who wants to invade practically every Muslim country on the planet,” Trump said at the Novi, Michigan, rally on Saturday. “And let me tell you, the Muslims of our country, they see it, and they know it.”

Vice President Kamala Harris holds a town hall event with former Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) in Wisconsin on Oct. 21. Trump has used their joint campaigning to woo Arab and Muslim voters. Sara Stathas/The Washington Post/Getty Images

Harris herself has not explicitly created daylight between her foreign policy views and those of Liz Cheney. In an interview on “The Daily Show” last week, however, Harris’ running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, explicitly promised host Jon Stewart that Harris would not implement the Cheneys’ “foreign policy decisions and discussions.”

Still, Trump’s effort to hit Harris for her association with Cheney might be more plausible to an ordinary voter, because there isn’t a “great degree of detail about what [Harris’] foreign policy would look like,” according to Eli Clifton, a senior adviser at the anti-interventionist Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft.

Trump’s record and approach are clearer, though they should not be especially comforting to voters who want the U.S. to be more even-handed in its approach to Israel or otherwise take a less bellicose approach to the Middle East, Clifton noted.

Advertisement

Among other decisions, Trump moved the U.S. embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and tore up the U.S.-Iran nuclear agreement. And Miriam Adelson, the Israeli American widow of casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson and staunch advocate for right-wing Israeli policies, remains one of the biggest financial backers of Trump’s bid for a second term.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Puerto Rico’s roughly 3 million residents cannot vote for the U.S. president. But nearly twice as many Puerto Ricans live in states like Pennsylvania, New York and Florida, and they can.

El Nuevo Día, the island’s newspaper of record, on Tuesday called on members of the Puerto Rican diaspora to vote for Democratic nominee Kamala Harris over her Republican opponent, Donald Trump.

Advertisement

“Trump has for years maintained a discourse of contempt and misinformation against the island that reveals an obsession and disdain for a people who do not have the power of the vote to defend themselves, since the three million American citizens who live in Puerto Rico cannot vote in the presidential elections,” María Luisa Ferré Rangel, the head of the media group that owns the daily newspaper, wrote in an editorial. “However, the other five million who live in the United States, whom they also labeled as trash, can vote.”

The majority of Puerto Ricans living in the U.S. reside in electorally uncompetitive states such as New York and Florida. But as many as 500,000 live in Pennsylvania, a hotly contested state where President Joe Biden won by just 80,000 votes in 2020.

The endorsement came two days after comedian Tony Hinchcliffe performed a set at a Trump rally in Manhattan’s Madison Square Garden.

“There’s a lot going on. I don’t know if you guys know this, but there’s literally a floating island of garbage in the middle of the ocean right now. I think it’s called Puerto Rico,” Hinchcliffe said at Sunday’s event, to muted applause and jeers.

Advertisement

The remark reignited many Puerto Ricans’ longstanding anger at Trump for his mishandling of the aftermath of 2017’s Hurricane Maria, the Category 5 storm from which the island’s infrastructure has yet to fully recover. In one infamous televised moment, Trump showed up at an emergency relief center to chuck rolls of paper towels at a crowd waiting to gather supplies.

People march along Las Americas Highway in October 2021 to protest continued blackouts years after Hurricane Maria in San Juan, Puerto Rico. via Associated Press

His administration then limited relief funds to the U.S. territory, stymying reconstruction and allowing Puerto Rico to languish without electricity for 11 months, the second-longest blackout in world history. Trump went on to ask his secretary of homeland security at the time whether the U.S. could sell Puerto Rico, which the U.S. has considered a “possession” of the American government since seizing the island as a colony and military outpost following the Spanish-American War of 1898.

“Let’s not forget the paper towels he threw at us while we suffered without electricity for months, and let’s not forget that the funds did not arrive because Trump ― through the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development ― told them to stop because he considered Puerto Ricans ‘bums who live begging,’” read the editorial in El Nuevo Día. “It is cowardly to insult those who cannot defend themselves.”

Harris drew criticism during her first visit to Puerto Rico in March, when she attended a fundraiser held by English-speaking Americans who relocated to the island to take advantage of a controversial tax haven scheme that frees new residents from paying any levy on income. In a moment that seemed to show the vice president as out of touch, she was filmed clapping along to a song protesting against her.

Advertisement

Harris, Tuesday’s editorial concluded, “is not perfect.” But amid weekly if not daily power outages in some areas, the Biden administration has established key task forces in the federal government to speed up the reconstruction of a critical electrical grid. And Biden’s secretary of energy, Jennifer Granholm, has made repeated visits to the island to oversee those efforts.

Residents watch from their porch as Vice President Kamala Harris speaks after touring a private home in Canovanas, Puerto Rico, on March 22, 2024. DREW ANGERER via Getty Images

During the Trump rally on Sunday, the Harris campaign put out a video of the Democratic nominee pledging to create another task force to promote economic opportunity on the island.

“It’s about giving people access to opportunity, knowing that the people in all communities — in all communities — they want, yes, a job, but they want to be able to build wealth,” Harris said, according to a White House press pool report. “They want to be able to build intergenerational wealth, home ownership, small business growth, right? So I call it an opportunity economy. The thing I mentioned this morning is I’m going to create basically an opportunity economy Task Force for Puerto Rico.”

Noting that “we may not fully know all aspects of the candidate due to the fact that she entered the race three months before the election,” El Nuevo Día nevertheless applauded Harris for being “courageous enough to step forward and accept the challenge.”

Advertisement
CNN —

With the 2024 presidential contest expected to be the most litigated in American history, both campaigns have spent years laying the groundwork for a post-election courtroom battle by recruiting lawyers in every state, wargaming possible scenarios and drafting potential pleadings.

Courts across the country have been flooded with lawsuits far earlier than in the 2020 election, mostly from Republican-aligned groups challenging everything from ballot rules to voter qualifications. And the legal challenges could continue for weeks or months to come.

Even issues that appear to have been resolved by state or federal courts could be revived after Election Day as so-called zombie lawsuits, if either party believes those court fights could deliver the votes needed to win what is now considered a dead heat.

In anticipation, both campaigns have assembled teams of lawyers in battleground states and beyond.

On Donald Trump’s side, veteran election lawyer Gineen Bresso is heading up the GOP’s so-called election integrity efforts, while David Warrington is serving as the campaign’s general counsel. Warrington is a Washington, DC-based lawyer who represented the former president during the House select committee’s investigation into the January 6, 2021, US Capitol attack.

After courts tossed all but one GOP lawsuit after the 2020 election, and several lawyers lost their licenses or faced criminal charges over efforts to undermine that election, sources close to the Trump campaign and Republican National Committee say they have been focused on recruiting legal talent this time around.

“The first priority was hiring top lawyers,” a source familiar with the party strategy told CNN. “We want to make sure we did not have a repeat of past events.”

Former White House counsel Dana Remus, who led the Joe Biden legal team in the last election, will again lead the legal fight for Vice President Kamala Harris. Sources familiar with the Democratic strategy say they have recruited hundreds of lawyers across key states with the expertise needed to fight a variety of challenges they could face.

“Prepare, prepare, prepare,” Remus, senior counsel to the campaign, told CNN in an interview. “They have started earlier, and we have started earlier too. We never stopped preparing since 2020.”

Just 30% of registered voters think Trump will accept the results of the election and concede if he loses, according to CNN poll results released Monday.

Deep Democratic bench

With the specter of 2020, during which Trump fought the legitimate election results, looming large, Democrats have spent the past four years building a team to handle whatever legal challenges arise this cycle.

Remus, who provides the overall strategic direction, played a pivotal role in fending off Trump challenges to the 2020 election results and a key role in Biden’s decision to not assert executive privilege over documents that Trump tried to keep out of the hands of the January 6 committee. She has deep Democratic ties, having previously served in former President Barack Obama’s administration. (Obama even officiated her wedding in 2018.)

Marc Elias, a well-known election attorney who has been a senior lawyer for the past five Democratic presidential candidates, and his namesake law firm are leading the campaign’s strategy on recounts – just as they did in 2020.

The legal team also relies on a team of advisers, including longtime Biden lawyer Bob Bauer, who advises on litigation strategy and voter protection, and former US Solicitors General Don Verrilli and Seth Waxman.

The Harris team has already worked through hypothetical legal scenarios, and sources have described drafting thousands of pages of filings they could quickly tailor in an array of court challenges.

So far, Republicans have targeted overseas voting and mail-in ballots that have traditionally favored Democrats, while backing efforts to purge suspected noncitizens from the rolls.

In addition, the Harris legal team is supported by a “field counsel” program that coordinates with local firms in each state that can provide specialized knowledge about election law and procedures in each jurisdiction.

And they have set up “voter protection” teams to serve on the ground in each state. These groups have recruited tens of thousands of volunteers to stand outside the polls and coordinate “chase a cure” programs that help voters fix mistakes that would otherwise disqualify their ballots.

GOP and ‘election integrity’

The RNC and Trump campaign have also built an extensive legal operation over the past two years that includes a network of local lawyers to help them assess state-level challenges. So far, Republicans have been involved in more than 130 lawsuits in the lead-up to November 5.

In April, the RNC announced the formation of an “election integrity” program, which it said was to ensure transparency and fairness in the 2024 elections. Bresso leads this operation. She previously served on the US Election Assistance Commission and as an elections counsel on Capitol Hill.

“We have built the most robust election integrity operation the country has ever seen,” Bresso said in a statement. “Our legal efforts are fighting to fix the problems in the system, hold election officials accountable, protect election safeguards, and defend the law.”

Mike Davis, president of the conservative group Article III Project and a key adviser to Trump on judicial selection, said the former president’s legal team “is so much better prepared this time than in 2020.” He noted Trump’s wins at the Supreme Court granting him presidential immunity for official acts and turning back efforts to disqualify him based on the “insurrectionist clause” in the 14th Amendment.

Sources close to the Trump legal team say they have not only focused on recruiting legal firepower but on identifying viable legal challenges. They’ve also engaged in wargaming exercises, including planning for natural disasters. After hurricanes devastated southern states in recent months, the RNC opposed efforts to extend voter registration deadlines.

“We saw what happened in North Carolina and Georgia and Florida,” the source familiar with the RNC’s strategy said, “and we said: ‘We’ve practiced this.’”

“We’ve been strategic about the lawsuits that we’ve decided to file,” the source added. “We did not go off and just file a bunch of lawsuits for the sake of filing a bunch of lawsuits. We’ll want to make sure the rules are followed, whatever those rules are.”

After the 2020 election, 61 of 62 lawsuits challenging the presidential election failed before Democratic-appointed and Republican-appointed judges.

Democrats say the GOP’s litigious approach this election cycle reflects Trump’s attempts on the campaign trail to once again preemptively cast doubt about the election and foreshadows more court battles if Harris wins.

“I cannot articulate why a drop box poses some greater threat to election integrity than a mailbox,” a Harris aide said, referring to GOP concerns over ballot drop boxes even as Trump sometimes encourages supporters to vote by mail.

Both camps insist they are trying to protect voters – and ensure the rules are clear for election officials.

“Trump understands that you have to invest money in the lawsuits and injunctions before the election because if you wait until after the election, judges are not going to side with you unless there is overwhelming evidence of fraud to overturn the entire state’s election,” said Davis, the Trump adviser.

“What we have to do is protect every voter and every vote, which is what we’re doing,” said Remus, of the Harris legal team. “Our institutions have held for every election, and I think we can trust in our institutions here as well.”

CNN’s Casey Gannon contributed to this report.
During this exhausting presidential campaign, Donald Trump has been talking out of both sides of his mouth about abortion, an issue that could cost him the election. He’s been trying to convince voters that he—the person most responsible for the end of Roe v. Wade—won’t restrict abortion nationwide, while also leaving Easter eggs for anti-abortion voters and activists. And now, at the eleventh hour, a shadowy group is barging in to muddy the waters even further.

A political action committee called RBG PAC—yes, after the former Supreme Court justice—started spending $20 million Friday on a campaign claiming that Trump has been clear that he opposes a national abortion ban (he hasn’t) and that Ruth Bader Ginsburg believed that the federal government shouldn’t dictate state abortion laws (far from it). Yet the group’s website has the gall to show both their photos, along with the phrase “Great minds think alike.”

The super PAC’s Federal Election Commission paperwork was signed by May Mailman, a former Trump legal adviser and current director of the Independent Women’s Law Center, part of an umbrella organization that slaps a feminist gloss on its opposition to both abortion and transgender rights. (Mailman also served as president of the Harvard Law School chapter of the Federalist Society.) It’s a so-called pop-up PAC that started spending money only after the last financial-disclosure deadline before Election Day, meaning that we won’t know who funded it until after the election. How convenient!

Advertisement

RBG PAC reported spending $17.3 million on digital media, $1.6 million on text messages, and $1 million on printing and postage.

It’s running two 30-second ads, both featuring an Oct. 1 Truth Social post in which Trump claims he would veto a national ban, a statement he made only after evading the question for months. The ads also show footage from the September debate with Vice President Kamala Harris, during which Trump twice declined to say he’d veto such legislation. But what viewers hear in the ads is Trump saying “I’m not signing a ban.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

An internal Independent Women’s network fundraising document for the 2024 campaign obtained by True North Research says the group will “debunk the fear-mongering” on abortion. This mirrors the group’s 2022 midterms strategy of trying to downplay the impact of Dobbs. One memorable ad from that cycle depicted a grandmother telling her concerned granddaughter that abortion isn’t the only important issue and that they will keep fighting for women’s rights. But that ad came directly from the Independent Women’s network, not a PAC named for a feminist-icon jurist.

Advertisement

This is far and away the most cynical abortion messaging I’ve seen this cycle, which is really saying something.

First, there’s the RBG of it all. Ginsburg’s criticism of Roe was that it should’ve been based in gender equality as opposed to a right to privacy—it wasn’t that she believed that the federal government had no role in abortion. The PAC website includes headline screenshots of stories in the New York Times and NBC News that explain how Ginsburg criticized Roe’s reasoning, but importantly, it does not link to them. If it did, readers could see that the justice was concerned not only that the ruling was prone to attacks, but that it also blunted the drive to pass protective federal legislation. Ginsburg’s granddaughter Clara Spera, an abortion rights lawyer, told the Times that the campaign is “nothing short of appalling.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

The larger goal of the PAC appears to be cleaning up Trump’s chaotic messaging on reproductive rights. Trump has said that abortion should be left to the states—emphasis on should, less declarative than will—but in the same breath he’ll argue that the issue isn’t as important as winning the election. We have seen Trump simultaneously say that abortion is no longer a top concern for voters, while also feeling the need to tell women that they “will no longer be thinking about abortion” if he wins. (What is he, a hypnotist?) Then, exactly one month before the election, when he’s polling terribly with women, former first lady Melania Trump claims that she supports abortion rights.

Advertisement

Advertisement

It has been rhetorical gymnastics all year long, but the PAC hilariously argues that Trump has been clear about his position and that “pro-choice” voters can feel secure in casting their ballot for him.

Related From Slate What to Make of Melania Trump’s Galling Abortion Rights Reveal Read More

Crucially, the ads omit the Project 2025 plan of Trump’s banning abortions nationwide without Congress. The playbook urges him to direct the Food and Drug Administration to revoke approval of the abortion drug mifepristone and to enforce the 19th-century Comstock Act to prohibit the mailing of drugs or devices used for abortion. Trump has tried to distance himself from Project 2025, but architects from a different think tank are now advising his campaign, and their group, the America First Policy Institute, calls for ending telemedicine abortion nationwide by mandating patient ultrasounds. A ban could also result from a lawsuit giving the Trump-stacked Supreme Court an opportunity to establish fetal personhood, an idea espoused in the GOP platform. (No, contrary to headlines, it was not “softened” this year.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

An optimist might say the existence of this truly nauseating PAC suggests that Trump’s allies are afraid abortion will cost him the election and they’re doing whatever they can to salvage his campaign. A pessimistic view is that uninformed voters will fall for the idea that Trump is “pro-choice”—even though he nominated the justice who replaced RBG, creating the fifth vote to overturn Roe.

After all, there are Trump voters who believe that having him back in the White House won’t affect abortion access. They’ve perhaps been buoyed by misleading media coverage of Trump’s empty pledges not to sign an abortion ban—reports that gloss over what exactly Trump considers to be a “ban” versus a “national minimum standard.”

It’s all the more striking, then, that a particular Trump comment from earlier this month didn’t get as much traction as previous statements.

Speaking on Oct. 13 about a national abortion ban, Trump said: “I think that it’s something that’s off the table now, because I did something that everybody has wanted to do, I was able to get it back to the states.” But then he added, ominously: “Now, we’ll see what happens.”
On Jan. 6, 2021, a young man named Caleb Berry joined with members of the far-right Oath Keepers group and stormed the Capitol. Like so many of his confederates, Berry was identified, charged and prosecuted.

Unlike many of his confederates, however, he apologized for his actions and cooperated with prosecutors in cases against other Jan. 6 rioters. As NBC News’ Ryan Reilly reported, Berry went so far as to express gratitude for having been arrested.

While it might seem strange to say, Berry told the judge Friday, he is thankful to federal prosecutors for bringing the case against him, saying they gave him a ‘stern wake-up call’ that took him off the ‘path of radicalization’ he was on. Berry called his conduct ‘foolish’ and said he let his emotions get the best of him because he thought he was doing something ‘for the greater good,’ but he had now come to realize that was ‘entirely false.’ Berry said he’ll regret his decisions ‘for the rest of my life.’

U.S. District Judge Amit Mehta, who oversaw Berry’s case, said the young man — 19 at the time of the assault on the Capitol — came to understand that the “cause wasn’t just, it wasn’t righteous. It was wrong.”

Thanks to his extensive cooperation with the Justice Department, the defendant was sentenced to three years’ probation.

That said, as Reilly’s report added, “With just days left until the 2024 election, Donald Trump supporters who fell for his lies about fraud in the last election continue to face legal consequences for storming the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, even as Trump managed to stave off his own criminal trial and again become the Republican presidential nominee.”

As we recently discussed, this has happened quite often of late, with more than a few Jan. 6 rioters coming to terms with the fact that they were conned — “duped,” as one criminal defendant recently put it — by a man who filled them with lies and manipulated them for his own purposes.

When I last wrote about this, I heard from some readers who thought my piece was overly sympathetic to Jan. 6 criminals. These readers argued that the rioters — even those who’ve since come to realize the error of their ways — were adults; they had agency; and they were held accountable for participating in an illegal assault on our democracy. Yes, they were lied to, but that doesn’t make them victims. These folks should’ve known better than to believe ridiculous conspiracy theories without a shred of evidence.

It’s certainly a fair point, which I agree with. My broader observation, however, wasn’t about whether to feel sympathy for those who fell for Trump’s deception, but rather to emphasize a larger concern about that accountability.

The Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office wasn’t just responsible for deploying an armed mob to attack his own country’s seat of government, he’s continuing to make matters worse as Election Day 2024 draws closer.

As recently as two weeks ago, for example, he compared Jan. 6 criminals to victims of Japanese internment camps. The same day, the GOP nominee also amplified a conspiracy theory that “the government staged a riot to cover up the fact that they certified a fraudulent election.”

A day earlier, Trump told a Univision town hall audience that there was “nothing done wrong” during the assault on the Capitol, while using the word “we” in reference to the insurrectionist rioters who attacked at his behest.

It’s against this backdrop that the former president is moving closer to a possible return to the White House, even as some of his former followers — some regretful, some not — find themselves in court, charged with crimes they committed at his direction.

The man who lied gets rewarded, while those who were lied to get punished. Trump expects to get power, while those who trusted him get criminal records.

As the American electorate wonders whether to put their trust in an erratic criminal running on an authoritarian platform, these stories have some allegorical value.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Normally, we say that a candidate ran for office. But for Vice President Kamala Harris, it's been more of a sprint.

In just four months since she went from being on the ticket with President Joe Biden to being the Democratic nominee, she has had to improvise, borrowing a campaign staff and putting together a platform and a strategy in short order.

Nonetheless, she has owned it.

She has raised the money, debated her opponent and has barnstormed in the swing states. She has shown herself to be knowledgeable and prepared in multiple interviews, including on Fox News. She can be witty, especially with off-the-cuff comments like the one when she told hecklers, “Oh, you guys are at the wrong rally … I think you meant to go to the smaller rally down the street.”

Most of all, she has shown herself to be bold. There is no other way to describe the decision to hold Tuesday’s rally at the Ellipse, a park just outside the White House.

As a former prosecutor, Harris knows the importance of a closing argument, and nothing will contrast her more with former President Donald Trump, who stood at the same location on Jan. 6, 2021, and told supporters, “So we’re going to, we’re going to walk down Pennsylvania Avenue. I love Pennsylvania Avenue. And we’re going to the Capitol.”

While Harris presents her finely tuned message, Trump is going off script, as usual.

In the final days before the election, the Trump campaign is busy explaining away the ugly rhetoric, vulgar jokes and incoherence of his bizarre rally at Madison Square Garden.

His campaign, which had a lot more time than Harris', developed a targeted message about inflation and the economy that Trump has repeatedly thrown aside in favor of whatever popped into his head just before he got on stage.

It's the difference between impulse and improvisation. Trump had all the time in the world and still couldn't stay on task, while Harris was thrown into the race at the last minute and has pulled it off masterfully.

If that doesn't show how they would approach the presidency in starkly different ways, I'm not sure what would.

Sign up for MSNBC’s new How to Win 2024 newsletter and get election insights like this delivered to your inbox weekly.
A version of this story appears in CNN’s What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here.

CNN —

Who, what, when and where? It can be valuable to take a step back from the day-to-day news and look with a wider lens at the election playing out.

Here are answers to some more general questions that can get lost at the end of the campaign.

When is Election Day?

US law requires a presidential election every four years. These general elections, since 1845, are required to occur on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November. This year, that date is November 5.

States oversee their own elections, which means polling times vary from state to state. The first polls close on Election Day at 6 p.m. ET in some counties in Indiana and Kentucky, and the last polls close at 1 a.m. ET Wednesday, November 6, in Alaska. Waves of state polls close every hour in between. But many millions of Americans will vote early in person or by mail.

Get information about your state in CNN’s Voter Handbook.

Why does Election Day last more than one day?

Each state conducts their election a little bit differently. Some, like in Washington state, Oregon and Utah, are done almost entirely by mail, a process that stretches for weeks.

Every state has some form of early voting available, which opens the process to people who can’t get to the polls on Election Day and ensures as many people cast ballots as possible.

Voters wait in line to cast their ballots on the first day of early in-person voting in one of the mountainous counties badly affected by Hurricane Helene, in Marion, North Carolina, on October 17, 2024. Jonathan Drake/Reuters

The Democrat is Vice President Kamala Harris, who is on the ballot with Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz as her vice presidential running mate.

The Republican is former President Donald Trump, who is running this year with Sen. JD Vance of Ohio.

There are other candidates, and the options vary by state. The Libertarian Party’s Chase Oliver is on most ballots, and the Green Party’s Jill Stein is an option in most states as well. The former Democrat Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is also on the ballot in many states. He had been running as an independent but has since endorsed Trump.

That said, the vast majority of Americans will vote for either Harris or Trump.

Read more about the presidential candidates.

Why are Trump and Harris the main options?

The two major parties, Republicans and Democrats, each held primary elections across the country earlier in the year.

Despite the fact that many Republicans repudiated Trump after his supporters stormed the Capitol building following his loss in the 2020 election, the former president easily emerged from a crowded field of primary candidates to be the GOP nominee again this year. It’s the third straight election where Trump is the Republican nominee.

For Democrats, President Joe Biden dominated the primaries and faced only token opposition. But after the primary season, concerns about Biden’s age – he’s 81 – accelerated. After CNN hosted a debate in June in which Biden fared poorly against Trump, the president bowed to pressure and dropped out of the race before Democrats held their nominating convention.

Biden’s endorsement of Harris, his vice president, helped make her the consensus nominee despite the fact that she did not take part in primaries. No Democrats rose to challenge her at the convention in August.

Vice President Kamala Harris speaks as former President Donald Trump listens during a presidential debate at the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia on September 10, 2024. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

When will we know who won?

It could take a while. CNN did not project a winner in 2020 until four days after Election Day. Multiple states were decided by incredibly close margins that year.

In 2016, Hillary Clinton conceded the day after Election Day even though counting was still happening in multiple states. She acknowledged she would not win.

Trump is unlikely ever to acknowledge defeat. If there are close margins in key states, it could take days to determine a winner. The good news is that many states have made changes since 2020 to make it easier for election officials to get a head start on processing mail-in ballots, which take longer to count.

In 2000, one of the closest elections in US history, the winner was not apparent until 36 days after the election when the US Supreme Court ended recounts in Florida. Things were complicated that year by flawed paper ballots in some Florida counties, something that should not be a problem this year.

It could also end up not being that close of an election at all, and networks like CNN could project a winner on election night. We shall see.

What are the main issues?

One overriding issue is the cost of living. Prices spiked after the Covid-19 pandemic, and Trump has capitalized on a nostalgia people have for a time when the cost of groceries was lower. His plan to impose across-the-board tariffs on foreign goods might spike prices further, according to economists, but he has an advantage over Harris on the economy, according to polling.

Trump voters are also motivated by immigration. He would deport millions of migrants who crossed the border illegally, and he would all but shut down the US border.

Read more about the promises Trump has made on the campaign trail.

For Harris voters, the issue of abortion is key. After the Supreme Court, with a third of justices appointed by Trump, overturned Roe v. Wade, Harris has framed reproductive rights as matter of personal freedom and has pledged to protect those rights.

There are ballot initiatives in key states to enshrine abortion rights. The issue is helping drive a gender gap in the vote, according to polling.

Read more about Harris’ campaign promises.

There is also the key issue of democracy. Trump was accused by the Justice Department of election interference after he tried to overturn the 2020 election results. That’s a nonstarter for many Democrats. Republicans, meanwhile, have largely grown to accept Trump’s role in the effort to keep Biden from the White House after he won in 2020. And many of them, after years of Trump questioning the system, now doubt the 2020 results themselves.

Trump was convicted on felony charges in New York related to hush money payments before the 2016 election. His sentencing is set for late November, meaning it will be after Election Day. However, his felony convictions, or even the possibility of jail time, don’t make Trump ineligible to serve as president.

How is a president elected in the US?

More than 150 million people are likely to cast ballots for the office of president on or before Election Day. But it’s 538 electors who will choose the president in a process that snakes through December and January.

When voters cast ballots, they are actually selecting a slate of electors tied to the candidate who wins the popular vote in each state.

The electors will then cast votes for president and vice president in each state’s capitol on December 17. That meeting is also known as the Electoral College, and it’s required in the Constitution.

Those electoral votes will be counted in the chamber of the House of Representatives on January 6, 2025, with the new Congress looking on.

The new president takes office on January 20, 2025.

How many electoral votes does each state get?

The number is tied to the size of a state’s congressional delegation, with one electoral vote for each senator and member of Congress.

The smallest states – Alaska, Delaware, the two Dakotas, Vermont and Wyoming – each get three.

With each additional member of Congress, a state gets one more elector. The most populous states are California (54 electoral votes), Texas (40 electoral votes) and Florida (30 electoral votes).

These numbers can change every 10 years because the Constitution requires an official population count, or census, and the number of congressional seats is then reapportioned. The most recent census occurred in 2020, so the number of electoral votes has changed.

Voters in Washington, DC, also get three electoral votes thanks to the 23rd Amendment, but they have no voting representation in the House or Senate. Other US citizens who don’t live in a state, like Puerto Ricans, aren’t so lucky when it comes to electoral votes.

How many electoral votes are there, and how many does it take to win the White House?

There are 538 electors. That figure is equal to 100 senators and 435 members of Congress, plus three votes for Washington, DC.

A majority of electoral votes is 270. Winning the White House is a mapping exercise for presidential candidates. They must pair the states that are safely in their column with enough battleground states to get to 270.

What are the battleground states in 2024?

There are thought to be seven states that could conceivably be won by either candidate. As a result, the campaigns have focused their energy in these areas. They can be broken up into two general categories.

A person drops off a mail-in ballot on October 15, 2024, in Doylestown, Pennsylvania. Hannah Beier/Getty Images

3 Midwestern battlegrounds, aka “the blue wall” – These are the manufacturing and union-heavy states of Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. They used to be more reliably Democratic but have shifted in recent years as their populations have changed and as Trump has appealed to White voters without a college degree.

When Trump won the White House in 2016, he won all three. When Biden won in 2020, he won all three. If Harris wins all three this year, she will likely have the electoral votes to be president. But polls suggest close races in all three. Turnout will be key, which for Harris means appealing to suburban women and Black voters. All three states have urban centers.

The blue wall states usually vote the same way. The last time they did not all go to the same candidate was in 1988 – notably also a year when California was red and West Virginia was blue. In those eight elections since 1988, the only time the blue wall states went to a Republican was in 2016, when they were won by Trump.

4 Sun Belt battlegrounds – These states with growing populations include Arizona and Nevada in the West and North Carolina and Georgia in the East. Arizona, Georgia and North Carolina used to be more reliably Republican. Trump won North Carolina twice, but the margins were close in 2020. The last Democrat to win there was Barack Obama in 2008. Biden was the first Democrat to win Georgia since Bill Clinton in 1992 and Arizona since Clinton in 1996.

1 vote in Nebraska is a battleground – 48 states award their electoral votes winner-take-all to the victor in their state. Nebraska and Maine do it differently, awarding votes by congressional district. The state of Nebraska is safe Trump territory, but the congressional district around Omaha is a battleground. That one vote could end up being very important in the event of a close race in the Electoral College.

Note: It’s the reverse situation in Maine, the only other state that does not award all of its electors to the statewide winner. Trump could pick up a single electoral vote in Maine.

What if there’s a tie?

The total number of electoral votes, 538, is an even number, which means a tie is conceivable. It’s happened once before, in 1800, although the rules were a bit different then. If no candidate reaches the 270 votes needed to win the election, the new Congress would pick the president and the Senate would pick the vice president in what’s known as a “contingent election.”

Each of the 50 states would get one vote (sorry, Washington, DC). Republicans currently control more House delegations. Even if they lose the overall House majority in November, Republicans would still probably control more than half of the congressional delegations. Delegations in which there’s an even split between Republicans and Democrats (currently there are two) would not be counted.

Bottom line: An Electoral College tie would likely result in a Trump presidency.

In the Senate, it’s a simpler process. Each senator would get one vote to select the vice president. Democrats have a slim majority at the moment, but they are defending more seats on Election Day and there’s a good chance Republicans will control the Senate come January.

How are members of Congress elected, and why is the balance of power key?

Every two years, every seat in the House, all 435 of them, is up for grabs. Most of those seats are relatively safe for either Republicans or Democrats, but there is always the possibility that the majority changes hands.

Democrats are favored in 208 races and Republicans are favored in 212, according to preelection House race ratings from Inside Elections with Nathan L. Gonzales. With just 15 races listed as toss-ups, it’s likely that neither party will have a very large majority next year.

Changes in the balance of power have actually happened more in recent elections. This year, Republicans are heading into the election with a small majority, and it’s entirely possible that Democrats win their own small majority for the next House even if they lose the White House and control of the Senate.

The US Capitol in Washington, DC, on September 18, 2024. Kent Nishimura/Bloomberg/Getty Images/File

It’s important for either party to control the House. Presidents need control to enact their priorities. The out-of-power party wants control to block the president’s priorities. In an ideal world, the two sides would work together to find consensus on issues like immigration and the tax code.

How do things work in the Senate?

It’s a little bit different in the Senate, where only a third of the seats are up for grabs every two years. Democrats are on defense as they try to defend their slim Senate majority.

Of the 34 seats for which there is an election this year, Democrats are defending 20 and Republicans are defending 13. Two of those Democratic seats, in West Virginia and Montana, are likely to be won by Republicans, according to the Senate race ratings. Another one, in Ohio, is rated as a toss-up.

Democrats hope they can pick up an unexpected win in either Texas or Florida, but Republicans are on pace to have a slim majority in the Senate next year. Assuming Republicans hold all of the seats they currently hold, they can control the chamber if they flip one Democratic seat and win the White House (the vice president breaks ties in the Senate) or win two seats regardless of the outcome of the presidential race.

No matter who has control of the Senate, neither party is expected to have a supermajority. That’s important because senators generally abide by a custom of respecting the filibuster. It usually requires 60 votes to enact major pieces of legislation, although both Republicans and Democrats have found ways around that in recent years.

Republicans found a way to enact tax cuts under Trump without 60 votes. Democrats did the same thing with their Inflation Reduction Act, which, among other things, aims to transition the US to a greener economy.
“You feel you have all known this somewhere. Never again will you read about Berlin in the ’30s without remembering this wild confrontation here of two irrational forces. The American sickness has finally been localized.”

These words were written about a noxious political rally that took place shortly before a presidential election at New York City’s Madison Square Garden. But they don’t refer to what happened on Sunday night when former President Donald Trump spoke at the world’s most famous arena.

Rather, they were written nearly 50 years ago, in 1968, by Richard Strout, a columnist for The New Republic, when another demagogue preaching division and fear spoke at MSG — former Alabama Gov. George Wallace.

In a year of terrifying political events that shone a bright and unsettling light on the racism, intolerance and hatred in American society, Wallace’s 1968 election-eve speech in New York was arguably one of the most unsettling. In the heart of liberal America, Wallace’s army of followers gathered — and as was the case in every other venue where Wallace spoke that year, violence soon followed.

Wallace’s 1968 election-eve speech in New York was arguably one of the most unsettling.

Outside the arena, fistfights and shoving matches broke out with anti-communist John Birchers, neo-Nazis and Klansmen on one side and Trotskyites, Yippies and Black Power activists on the other.Inside, a country music band played “The Star-Spangled Banner,” “God Bless America,” “Yankee Doodle Dandy” and “Dixie,” while the assembled crowd chanted, “N-----s get out!” “Go back to Africa!” and “White power!” The protesters, who had sneaked their way past security, responded with “Pig! Pig! Pig!” and “Two-four-six-eight, we don’t want a fascist state!”

When Wallace finally took the stage, he thrust his arms in the air in victory like the amateur pugilist he’d been in his youth. “I used to be a boxer, and I been wanting to fight the main event in the Garden for a long time,” he told the crowd. The response, said a writer for Newsday, “may have been the loudest, most terrifying, sustained human din ever heard in New York.”

Wallace’s speech followed its usual path. As the protesters chanted epithets at him, he threw them back at them. “Why don’t you come on down here. … I’ll autograph your sandals,” he mocked. “I have a new word to teach you: S-O-A-P.”

As fights broke out, Wallace didn’t ask for peace. Instead, he sneered at the assaulted demonstrators. “Well, you come for trouble, you got it.”In words that echo Wallace’s rhetorical prodigy, Donald Trump, he made clear the stakes for the upcoming election: “The American people are not going to stand by and see the security of our nation imperiled, and they’re not going to stand by and see this nation destroyed, I can assure you that.”

Wallace was talking about the threat of racial integration. Back in 1968, crime rates were actually rising, and riots in major American cities actually took place (only months earlier, after the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., dozens of American cities exploded in violence. Smoke from fires in Washington, D.C., floated over the White House, making for the most violent period of domestic upheaval since the Civil War).

In words that echo Wallace’s rhetorical prodigy, Donald Trump, he made clear the stakes for the upcoming election.

Trump’s target is the largely anecdotal fear of migrant crime and crime rates that continue to decline, but, like Wallace’s rhetoric from nearly 50 years ago, it’s also fear of the other — fear of Black men in 1968 to fear of a Black woman in 2024. Perhaps, above all, Wallace’s appeal was driven by fear or change — fear that the progress of the present would replace the nostalgia of the past. One analyst called Wallace’s message “an ideology of preservatism” — or, in modern terms, Making America Great Again.In 1968, Wallace warned that “anarchy prevails today in the streets of the large cities of our country, making it unsafe for you to even go to a political rally.”

In 2024 at a Madison Square Garden, Trump said he “will rescue every city and town that has been invaded and conquered, and we will put these vicious and bloodthirsty criminals in jail.” According to Trump, “We will crush violent crime and give our police the support, protection, resources and respect that they so dearly deserve.”

Wallace’s solution in 1968 was the same, albeit more colorful. “The way to stop a riot is to hit someone on the head,” he used to say.

In 1968, Wallace warned about the pseudo-intellectuals, “the liberals and the left-wingers” and the bearded college professors who couldn’t park their bicycles straight. In 2024, the bogeymen are the “woke liberals,” the communists and the trans activists. Different names but the same target.

Like Trump, Wallace taunted and ridiculed his political opponents ... but then again, he never called them “an enemy within” or threatened his political opponents with retribution. He even accepted his electoral defeat in 1968.

Wallace was one of the most openly racist politicians in modern American history (he said in almost every speech that he never said a derogatory word about any person “because of race, color, creed, religions or national origin,” which might have been true in public, but certainly wasn’t in private). His speeches were full of racial tropes. In Alabama he was an avowed white supremacist — though he toned that down when he campaigned for president.

Still, even Wallace was rarely as ostentatiously racist as Trump. The kind of crude humor at Trump’s MSG hatefest, like calling Puerto Rico “a garbage island,” comparing Kamala Harris to a “prostitute” or calling her the “Antichrist,” likely wouldn’t have occurred at a Wallace rally (though when Wallace spoke, the chances that a full-fledged melee would take place were much more likely).

Like Trump, Wallace taunted and ridiculed his political opponents ... but then again, he never called them an ‘enemy within.’

But one of the biggest differences between Wallace and Trump is their positions within the political ecosystem. Wallace was an outsider, vilified by liberals and distrusted by conservatives (albeit as much for his liberal economic positions as his racial views). Moderate Republicans (yes, they once existed) who believed that the GOP should seek the support of Black voters were outraged by Wallace’s overtly racist appeals.Wallace ran as a third-party candidate in 1968, and though he had one of the best third-party results in American political history, he still received only 13.5% of the vote. Though he was a Democrat (an essential political affiliation in the Deep South), he was largely shunned by the national Democratic Party, even when he joined the party and ran for president as a Democrat in 1972. Republicans, over time, adopted his rhetorical flourishes, his conservative populism and his attacks on “big government.” But they went out of the way to use a dog whistle rather than Wallace’s train whistle. (It is important to note that Wallace, running for president again in 1972, survived an assassination attempt, which led him to become a born-again Christian and renounce his past racist and segregationist views.)

In short, Wallace succeeded in influencing the political debate ... but enjoyed none of his own political success. Nearly five decades later, his political toxicity and his divisive rhetoric haven’t been dispatched to the ash can of history. Instead, it has been adopted and weaponized by the modern Republican Party.

On Sunday night at Madison Square Garden, Donald Trump didn’t just step in George Wallace’s shoes. He put on a much bigger and uglier pair.
is a senior correspondent on the Culture team for Vox, where since 2016 she has covered books, publishing, gender, celebrity analysis, and theater.

Two girls with pink pussy hats watch hundreds of thousands gather on Pennsylvania Avenue in the March for Our Lives Rally and Protest, Washington, DC, 2018. Visions of America/Universal Images Group via Getty Images

Kamala Harris’s campaign for president is in many ways among the most feminist campaigns in history. Just don’t mention the f-word.

Harris has pointedly avoided talking about her status as the potential first woman president, much less embraced a feminist label. It’s a marked departure from the suffragist-white pantsuit symbolism Hillary Clinton touted during her own historic 2016 campaign. At this summer’s Democratic National Convention, only a single speech from Clinton focused on Harris’s trailblazing place in history, with Clinton referring to the central metaphor of her failed bid: that stubbornly unshattered glass ceiling.

At the same time, Harris has championed undeniably feminist policy goals. She’s kept reproductive freedom central to her campaign, is the first sitting vice president to ever visit an abortion provider (no sitting president ever has, either), and advocated for child care policies as a core part of her economic message.

As much as she doesn’t want to talk about it, it’s difficult to avoid the fact that Harris is the first woman of color and the second woman ever to be the nominee of a major party. She may not be embracing a feminism label, but if we define feminism as seeking the political, economic, personal, and social equality of the sexes, her candidacy by its very existence fits the bill.

Political observers have read Harris’s decision not to lean into her race and gender identity as savvy, mostly because of the trauma of what happened to Clinton after she went all-in on feminism. But it also speaks volumes about the place feminism, as a movement and an ideology, holds in popular culture in 2024 — one very different from the place it enjoyed in 2016.

Today, Explained Understand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Feminist policies are still popular. People like abortion rights. They like the idea of child care reform. But feminism as a label is far less galvanizing. Instead, it seems to be in the odd position of appearing too dull, compromised, and centrist to be of interest to the left and too dangerous and radical to be embraced by the right. Its repositioning might be best understood as a feminist vibe shift: It just feels different now than it did the last time around.

There’s a sense that feminism is less essential to mainstream Democrats now than it was a few election cycles ago. That may in part be a reaction to the hard-fought Democratic primaries of 2016 and 2020, when leftists argued bitterly over whether women voting against Bernie Sanders and for Clinton (in 2016) or Elizabeth Warren (in 2020) were “voting with their vaginas.”

In the rhetoric of some of Sanders’s most vocal and inflammatory supporters in those primaries, wanting a woman to be president became something intellectually unserious, insufficiently progressive, a little gauche, a little uncool. It meant you were prioritizing gender solidarity over class solidarity.

It centers on how meaningless the symbolism of a woman president is and how silly it might be for women to care about it

Sanders himself occasionally appeared to echo this sentiment in a softer form. “It is not good enough for somebody to say, ‘I’m a woman, vote for me,’” he said in 2016. In 2020, Warren said he had told her a woman could not win the presidency (Sanders denied it).

Sanders didn’t win either primary, but the recurring debate each election cycle helped create and standardize a set of derisive talking points that remains popular today. It centers on how meaningless the symbolism of a woman president is and how silly it might be for women to care about it. You see this strain of attack rearing its head when Harris’s detractors say that in her ambiguous stance on Gaza, she is simply gaslight gatekeep girlboss genociding, a taunt that pokes at her gender. Why worry about representation and identity politics, the thinking goes, when you should be focused on policy.

On the center-right, the issue with feminism isn’t that it’s too centrist but that it’s too extremist and alienating. It remains the subtext of one of the central differences between Republicans and Democrats this election, despite the vibe shift. Democrats overwhelmingly favor gender egalitarianism while Republicans want more traditional gender hierarchies.

That difference offers a potential explanation for the highly discussed political gender divide of Gen Z men and women. Post Me Too, young women seem to be breaking left while young men appear to be either staying constant with previous generational trends or tilting right. (The data here, it’s worth noting, is pretty inconsistent.)

The Survey Center on American Life, a nonpartisan organization run by the right-wing American Enterprise think tank, found that though young men and women had similar political views for most of the past two decades, in 2021, 44 percent of young women identified as liberal, while only 25 percent of young men did the same. Moreover, in a 2023 survey, 43 percent of Gen Z men said they generally think of themselves as feminists, compared to 52 percent of millennial men.

Not all Gen Z men are turning right. Yet for those who are, feminism offers a convenient scapegoat. Gen Z men “feel that rapidly changing gender roles have left them behind socially and economically,” the New York Times reported in August, “and see former President Donald J. Trump as a champion of traditional manhood.”

“For a growing number” of young men, writes Daniel A. Cox, director of the Survey Center on American Life at the American Enterprise Institute, in a Business Insider article, “feminism has less to do with promoting gender equality and more to do with simply attacking men.” Cox argues that as young men see the outcomes of their education, professional lives, and mental health go off a statistical cliff, they grow increasingly resentful of the political solidarity they see their peers find in feminism. “Out of a sense of increased insecurity, more young men are adopting a zero-sum view of gender equality,” Cox writes. “If women gain, men will inevitably lose.”

As the right positions itself as a safe haven for these men alienated by feminism, Democrats find themselves faced with the question of whether feminism is a liability if it’s losing them potential young voters. “If the Democrats are the ‘women’s party,’ as one party strategist claimed, it might not be surprising that men are looking in another direction,” a recent Politico article says.

The rightward turn of young men and the disenchantment of leftists and liberals all play a part here. But to be honest, I think what is most at work in feminism’s disappearance is not so much politics as it is pop culture. The publicity cycle that feminism is going through right now feels eerily familiar to me as a feminist writer who covers women in pop culture. It’s the same one every female star on the rise experiences: At first she’s beloved, and then she’s overhyped and overexposed.

After the regressive misogyny of the George W. Bush era, feminism began trending upward as the country embraced Barack Obama. In the early 2010s, Beyoncé and Taylor Swift alike declared themselves feminists, and trendy new direct-to-consumer corporations adopted feminist mission statements as swiftly as they adopted chic sans-serif millennial pink logos. After the dual traumas of the Trump election and the explosion of Me Too, feminism roared into focus as one of the central concerns of the nation. It felt vital and serious and important because it was. It was also already commodified, and about to get more so.

The pussy hat is the most illustrative feminist icon of those years. After its arrival in 2017, it appeared on runway shows, magazine covers, and the short-lived Will and Grace revival (Grace uses hers to sneak candy into movies). Every time it showed up, it seemed to lose a little more edge.

We had a decade of corporate-friendly, easy, mainstream feminism being very, very popular in ways that were of use to the salesmen of major corporations and electoral politics alike.

The same thing kept happening over and over again with all the most popular feminist commodities and archetypes of those years. Hollywood released dozens of pop culture revivals and reboots and sequels that tried to justify their existence via their feminism, and then they turned out to be not very good. The famous girlbosses turned out to be scammers and bullies.

We had a decade of corporate-friendly, easy, mainstream feminism being very, very popular in ways that were of use to the salesmen of major corporations and electoral politics alike. It got defanged, and then it got boring. Now it’s out of fashion.

The good news is that what’s going out of fashion is simply the decade-old signifiers of feminism, not its substance. Reproductive freedom is incredibly politically popular. The past decade of mainstream feminism has left the movement with dozens of powerful activists and networks ready to activate.

A woman is running for president and has decent odds of making it. She just seems to think her chances of being the first woman president are better as long as she never, ever talks about it.

On the other hand, if Harris loses even after being so careful about the f-word and all the baggage that comes with it; if we learn that America would rather reelect the man who helped overthrow Roe v. Wade and was found criminally liable of sexual assault than grant the office to yet another perfectly capable woman, no matter how neatly she sidesteps identifying as a feminist — well, if that happens, we’ll have learned a lot about what this country really thinks about women and the project of their political and social equality.
Donald Trump has spent a considerable amount of time in recent weeks boasting about plans to give Robert F. Kennedy Jr. an influential position in a possible second term. The former president hasn’t offered specific details, but he’s suggested that Kennedy — a lawyer with no professional background in medicine, science or public health — would work on health care policy in some capacity.

At one rally last week, Trump said he was committed to making America healthy again, adding, “Come on, Bobby. Bobby’s gonna do it. Bobby. Let’s go, Bobby. You gonna make us healthy, Bobby?”

At his highly controversial rally at Madison Square Garden on Sunday, the Republican nominee assured his audience he’d let Kennedy “go wild on health.”

Oddly enough, Trump’s own former surgeon general appears to have some concerns about this idea. Mother Jones reported:

Trump’s pledge alarmed public health professionals, including Dr. Jerome Adams, his own surgeon general. Unlike many other top officials appointed by Trump, Adams was actually qualified: he was praised by colleagues for successfully limiting an HIV outbreak in Indiana by establishing a needle exchange program, among other public health successes. On Monday, Adams spoke at a conference of the American Public Health Association — which endorsed his 2017 nomination as Surgeon General — on his concerns about Kennedy, especially his anti-vaccine stances.

The New York Times’ Sheryl Gay Stolberg reported from the conference, and quoted Trump’s former surgeon general warning attendees about the adverse impact Kennedy would have.

“If [Kennedy] has a significant influence on the next administration, that could further erode people’s willingness to get up to date with recommended vaccines, and I am worried about the impact that could have on our nation’s health, on our nation’s economy, on our global security,” Adams said.

The former surgeon general, who served nearly four years on Trump’s team after having worked with then-Gov. Mike Pence in Indiana, went on to say, “I would advise Republicans to tread very carefully in this world of allowing vaccine confidence to continue to be eroded and for us to go backwards on one of the number one public health achievements made in the last 50 to 75 years in this country.”

Public comments like these will very likely do lasting harm to Adams’ influence in the Trumpified GOP, but the former surgeon general offered sound advice.

As we recently discussed, the idea that Kennedy should be allowed to “go wild on health” in a Republican administration is more than a little bizarre.

As my MSNBC colleague Zeeshan Aleem recently explained, RFK Jr. “is best known for fringe conspiracy theories tied to vaccines and other medical interventions, such as the belief that antidepressants cause school shootings.”

NPR had a related report last year, noting, “Wi-Fi causes cancer and ‘leaky brain,’ Kennedy told podcaster Joe Rogan. ... Antidepressants are to blame for school shootings, he mused during an appearance with Twitter CEO Elon Musk. Chemicals in the water supply could turn children transgender, he told right-wing Canadian psychologist and podcaster Jordan Peterson, echoing a false assertion made by serial fabulist Alex Jones. AIDS may not be caused by HIV, he has suggested multiple times.”

To be sure, this is just scratching the surface.

Not to put too fine a point on this, but if his name were Robert F. Smith Jr., there’s obviously no way he’d be considered for a position of authority in the federal government. He’d be dismissed by the American mainstream as a fringe figure, better left ignored by serious people.

But in 2024, the Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office is nevertheless letting the public know — indeed, he’s boasting to voters — that this fringe figure with ridiculous ideas is “going to be a part” of his team in a second term, even as the former president’s surgeon general makes it clear just how unwise that would be.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
CNN —

Two very different futures await Hakeem Jeffries in January.

In one, the New York Democrat is sitting in the Oval Office with a woman he first met when she was a district attorney and he was a state assemblyman. He’d be a key shepherd for the legislative agenda of Kamala Harris, a peer and a contemporary who, like him, has blended a grounding in liberal Black politics with an emphasis on tilting toward centrism.

In another, Jeffries is sitting there with a fellow New Yorker he once referred to as a “grand wizard” and now says is “a singular, material, adverse change to the trajectory of our country” whom “the racists will have to be asked about why” they support. Facing down Donald Trump, he knows he’d be seen by many as a last bulwark for the Democratic Party – and perhaps for democracy itself.

In either case, Jeffries thinks he will likely be the new speaker of the House – and he has been quietly maneuvering every day since he succeeded Nancy Pelosi as the chamber’s Democratic leader to make that happen, as he detailed in an exclusive interview with CNN during a recent campaign swing in Omaha, Nebraska, very far from his Brooklyn home.

That Jeffries was in Omaha, where Democrats are trying to flip a Republican-held House seat, reflects a reality that many in the party did not expect this late in the cycle. Internal polls and calculations show that earlier hopes of getting to a House majority by picking up seats that Joe Biden would have won in 2020 under the current lines have faded – particularly in California and back home in New York, where many operatives believe the efforts look likely to come up short – while the map has expanded into new territory.

Though senior Democratic operatives involved in the efforts told CNN they believe they will still get the majority, they think it could be by a margin as slim as one seat.

Staring down that reality after this already bizarre election year, Jeffries has traveled more than 25,000 miles, whether sitting alongside New York Rep. Pat Ryan in a yarmulke at a meeting with Orthodox Jewish leaders or attending a voting rights roundtable in the Lehigh Valley with Pennsylvania Rep. Susan Wild or joining a Black small-business roundtable squeezed into a clothing shop in Omaha, where afterward he bought a pair of bright blue-striped socks and told the owner, “I may have to rock these on January 3,” the day he’s hoping to be handed the speaker’s gavel.

The evening before, House Speaker Mike Johnson had promised at a campaign stop in Michigan that, after overseeing one of the least productive sessions of Congress, he would pursue an “aggressive agenda” if Republicans hold the chamber next year and Trump wins.

Jeffries interpreted that as a vow to enact Project 2025, the extensive right-wing agenda written by many former Trump officials and other supporters, which the Democratic leader called “a frightening 922-page document that is a blueprint for extreme MAGA Republican control over the lives and livelihood of the American people.”

But what got him almost sneering was the charge by Ohio Rep. Jim Jordan at the same event that if Republicans hadn’t won their slim majority in 2022, “we’d already been living in a completely Marxist country.”

Jeffries pointed to the votes his caucus took to prevent a debt ceiling default and a government shutdown and to save Johnson’s speakership.

“Jim Jordan should be thankful that House Democrats have taken a commonsense approach to governing from the very beginning,” he said.

Jeffries avoids much talk about what he would do as speaker himself – when pressed about what policy needs seemed consistent across all the districts he’s been to, all he offered was the general topic of housing, arguing that it “is no longer just a New York City issue or a San Francisco issue or a Boston issue or Los Angeles issue.” But he avoided any detail beyond just saying, “We have an opportunity for the federal government to do something meaningful.”

In one of his first leadership meetings after taking over two years ago, Jeffries told colleagues that he found two other examples in the past 100 years when House Democrats took the majority back only two years after losing it: 1948, when Harry Truman ran against the “do-nothing” Congress, and 1954, after Republicans followed Joe McCarthy’s lead into going after Americans as communists.

Jeffries has been guided by that. He’s hoping voters see the past two years that way themselves.

Jeffries arrives for a get-out-the-vote rally for Democratic candidate Tony Vargas in Omaha, Nebraska, on October 20, 2024. Bill Clark/CQ-Roll Call, Inc./Getty Images

A shrunken battlefield for House races

The landscape of competitive House races is smaller than ever, down to about 25 seats that Democrats and Republicans agree truly remain toss-ups. The margins that could decide those races and the future of the House may be smaller than ever too: In 2022, when the majority came down to five seats, Republicans’ combined advantage in the five closest races was all of 6,675 votes.

Anyone who knows anything about Jeffries knows he’s guarded and likes to speak in alliterative, three-part soundbites. He even has a 48-page illustrated book, “The ABCs of Democracy,” coming out a week after Election Day, which repurposes the speech he gave in the middle of the night two years ago after House Republicans, on their 15th ballot, elected a speaker they ended up tossing out nine months later.

Behind Jeffries’ calm exterior, he has taken a deliberately low-key but very forceful hand in candidate recruitment, fundraising, strategy and making sure all his candidates, both in the Capitol and on the trail, stick close to his “Team Normal vs. Team Extreme” formulation to draw a contrast with the GOP.

He has also in just a few months gone from a largely unknown congressman to one of his party’s most prolific fundraisers: House Majority PAC, the leading super PAC backing House Democratic candidates, and its affiliated groups, which have been Jeffries’ main focus, have gone from bringing in $134 million in all of the 2022 election cycle to $314 million by the end of September, according to the group’s figures.

Jeffries did this by opening up new networks of support, such as the Black Economic Alliance members he and Barack Obama met with in New York; making several trips to Chicago to win over lifelong Pelosi friend and Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker; and appealing to Rupert Murdoch’s daughter-in-law Kathryn Murdoch.

Some of Jeffries’ success comes from being a fresh face, with union leaders, donors or just semi-involved Democrats excited to sign on with the next generation.

“The biggest applause line I get when I go to districts is, ‘Help us win, because our goal and the uniting force of House Democrats is to make Hakeem Jeffries speaker of the House,’” said California Rep. Pete Aguilar, who is the very collaborative No. 3 on the House Democratic leadership team.

Heading into a fight for the majority immediately after taking over for a legendary leader, in the middle of a dysfunctional Congress and wild presidential campaign, has at times been hard to keep up with for Jeffries and his staff.

But the benefit of the presidential race drawing nearly all the attention and not having millions invested in negative advertising against him for years is that Jeffries has had more freedom to flex into swing districts across the country and elevate races with his national presence. In comparison, Pelosi would often slip in for closed-door fundraisers that the candidates themselves tended to avoid.

Despite relinquishing her leadership post almost two years ago, Pelosi has featured in more Republican attack ads this year than Jeffries, who has appeared in only one, out of Wisconsin.

January 6 looms on the new Congress

As the pro-Trump rioters closed in at the US Capitol on January 6, 2021, Jeffries was on the House floor, sizing up how he might have to fight his way out. The new Congress will be sworn in three days before the certification of the 2024 presidential election results, which sits in him like a pit.

Supporters of President Donald Trump clash with police and security forces as people storm the US Capitol in Washington, DC, on January 6, 2021. Brent Stirton/Getty Images/File

Jeffries’ objection to House Republicans is about policy, but also self-respect and competence.

One of his favorite phrases is “bend the knee” to describe people who give in and can’t stand for themselves. That’s how he sees many of his GOP colleagues acting when it comes to Trump and others on the far right of their caucus.

Jeffries said he’s often asked, “How are you dealing with these extremists on the other side of the aisle?”

“My view is, calm is an intentional decision,” he said. “These are extraordinary events and out-of-control individuals that we often have to deal with in Washington, DC. But that we will continue to make the decision to remain calm so we can process the problem set in front of us in a serious, sober and substantive manner.”

The prospect of working with Harris, particularly on her housing plan, excites him. Jeffries won’t admit it and deflects when asked, but several who have spoken to him told CNN that the possibility of having to work with Trump weighs on him. Though to the Rev. Al Sharpton – who has known Jeffries since he was a white-shoe firm lawyer and would meet with him at the Brooklyn Marriot to talk about working on civil rights cases that he didn’t think were too extreme – “the Bedford-Stuyvesant-Crown Heights side of him would come out” in such interactions

Jeffries, Sharpton told CNN, “is the most goal-oriented person that I’ve met in politics,” always focused on “how do we get there?”

In Omaha, Jeffries started the day with an interview on a hip-hop radio station and then services at Salem Baptist Church, talking about how he wants to restore the child tax credit and put together a real housing plan, in addition to passing the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. A week before, in the Antelope Valley outside Los Angeles, Jeffries was at another Black church with House hopeful George Whitesides, who later recalled an older Black woman telling him that she had always voted for Republicans but would be going with the Democrats this year because it meant so much to see the leader showing up there.

In Omaha, Tony Vargas, the Democrat hoping to unseat Republican Rep. Don Bacon, spoke glowingly of Jeffries’ visit and the guidance he has directly gotten from the leader, even though the most specific advice he could name was “Do the work.”

“It felt like, ‘This is real,’” Vargas told CNN as he sat on a bar patio reflecting on the multi-stop day on the trail he had just spent with Jeffries. “From everybody that I’m talking to, the fact that Leader Jeffries is here just coincided with what everybody else already believed.”

Ryan said he had a similar experience bringing Jeffries to his Hudson Valley district in New York, including among Republican elected officials who came to hear him talk about water infrastructure.

“Everybody recognizes that he’s likely to be the next speaker,” Ryan said of Jeffries. “Of all the uncertainty in the moment we’re in, the one thing I’m certain of is that Hakeem Jeffries is going to be speaker.”

The special election that became a model

Even in private, Jeffries listens a lot more than he speaks, but in public – whether it’s in interviews or what he allows colleagues or aides to reveal about him – he is insistently and deliberately boring. This is strategic, Democratic aides say: He wants people to talk about making him speaker because of what it would say about Democrats being in the majority and what they would get done – as if he would not be the one getting the bigger office and, eventually, the oil portrait in the Capitol.

Several involved in the discussions, though, revealed how this played out behind the scenes in a critical February special election on Long Island that in a way became a model for what has come after.

Heading up Interstate 87 in December, Tom Suozzi had Jeffries in his ear. Suozzi had given up his Long Island seat in Congress, only to see his dream of becoming governor of New York end with a crushing defeat to Gov. Kathy Hochul in a bitter primary and then watch Republican George Santos flip his district before being exposed as one of politics’ most creative liars. All Suozzi had to show for the experience was a questionable new beard.

For months, Jeffries checked in with Suozzi and nudged him along as he sought to win back his seat. Back in Washington, Jeffries held off his own members pushing for a vote to expel Santos because he thought the politics would be easier if Republicans had to first produce a bipartisan report detailing the congressman’s lies. Then after the House finally did kick Santos out, the key maneuver: Jeffries helped arrange a last-minute peace meeting at the governor’s mansion so Hochul could tell Suozzi how she thought he should run.

As Suozzi drove to Albany, Jeffries was on the phone coaching his candidate by repeating three words: remorseful, humble, patient. “RHP,” they started joking, like right-hand pitcher Tom Seaver, who they had both grown up watching on the Mets.

“You can be Tom Terrific now,” Jeffries told him.

Suozzi said he could get there on two of the three, but not remorseful.

Hochul finished the meeting feeling sufficiently deferred to. Suozzi felt he held his ground.

The special election ramped up. Local Jewish leaders stuck with Suozzi even though his Republican opponent was a veteran of the Israel Defense Forces. Black clergy in the district rallied around him. National Democrats gave him a pass on ripping them constantly over failing to do more on immigration. Money poured in.

Few saw Jeffries’ hand in each part of it. “This is the way to win the seat, the way to get to the majority,” he would say matter-of-factly, leading the various interest groups to come to their own decisions to back Suozzi.

When Suozzi won, he consulted two people about his first floor speech after being sworn in again: Jeffries and Bill Clinton. Jeffries suggested only a few tweaks, including how the congressman addressed Speaker Johnson in his remarks: “You said something I must gently take exception to. You said, ‘Tom Suozzi ran like a Republican,’” Suozzi said on the floor.

The word “gently” was a Jeffries addition. He thought it would be more of a jab, and a laugh line.

New York Rep. Tom Suozzi departs with his wife, Helene Suozzi, following a ceremonial swearing-in at the US Capitol in Washington, DC, on February 28, 2024. Nathan Howard/Getty Images

This past week, in between stops for other candidates, Jeffries was checking in on a text chain with Suozzi and a few other New York members about the House seats back home, including the two others on Long Island that Democrats are hoping to win.

“Your incredible campaign set the stage for what’s going on in Long Island and around the country,” Jeffries wrote, one person who read the texts said.

The corny boosterism went both ways, as it often does in conversations with Jeffries.

“Our incredible campaign,” Suozzi wrote back. “The best is yet to come, Mr. Speaker.”
Trump panned the CHIPS Act. Harris is in Michigan promoting it

toggle caption Jacquelyn Martin/AP

Vice President Harris toured a semiconductor plant in the swing state of Michigan on Monday to highlight big federal investments in manufacturing jobs that former President Donald Trump has recently panned.

The investments come from the CHIPS and Science Act — a bipartisan bill that's pouring $54 billion into the semiconductor manufacturing industry to try to bring back an industry that is dominated by Taiwan, South Korea and China.

"Look: we've got to win the competition for the 21st century. We're not gonna have China beat us in the competition for the 21st century," Harris said after touring a factory near Saginaw owned by Corning that makes polysilicon used in semiconductors.

The company received $325 million in CHIPS funding, and is nearly doubling its workforce to 3,000 people as it expands.

Sponsor Message

"These are the type of jobs that pay 40% above the regional median," Corning's chief executive Wendell Weeks said. "They help people build lives, raise families and foster strong communities."

The visit comes as some Democrats urge Harris to focus more on the economy in the waning days of the campaign.

Investments from the CHIPS Act have supported massive expansions of the semiconductor industry in Arizona — another swing state — as well as other regions of the country. The White House has said the projects backed by CHIPS funding have helped create more than 115,000 jobs.

toggle caption AP/AP

On Friday, Trump blasted the law during a lengthy interview on The Joe Rogan Experience. "That chip deal is so bad, Trump said on the podcast, saying the subsidies went to "rich companies."

Trump said he could have imposed tariffs to get more companies to built the facilities in the United States.
The Trump campaign tries to distance itself from Puerto Rico ‘joke’ at MSG rally

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

Vice President Harris was promoting a new pledge to boost Puerto Rico’s economy in Philadelphia on Sunday — contrasting her approach with that of former President Donald Trump — when her message got some unexpected traction thanks to her opponent’s rally in New York.

A comedian warming up the crowd at Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage” — drawing outrage from Boricuas far and wide, and boosting support for Harris’ message.

Megastar Bad Bunny posted Harris’ video message pledging to work to create more jobs on the island and rebuild its rickety power grid to his 45 million Instagram followers, and other Puerto Rican artists followed suit.

toggle caption Eva Marie Uzcategui/AFP

Trump's campaign has distanced itself from the joke, one of several offensive lines from his act. Trump himself did not yet directly comment on it at two campaign appearances in Georgia on Monday.

Sponsor Message

But speaking from Wausau, Wisconsin, Trump's running mate, Sen. JD Vance dismissed the controversy.

"The way that we unite the country is to talk about the issues the American people care the most about," Vance told reporters, saying he had heard about the offensive material but hadn't seen it.

"I'm not going to comment on the specifics of the joke, but I think that we have to stop getting so offended at every little thing in the United States of America — I'm so over it," Vance said.

Other Republicans similarly sought to distance Trump from the remark.

"Puerto Rico isn’t garbage, it’s home to fellow American citizens who have made tremendous contributions to our country," wrote Florida Sen. Marco Rubio in a post on X. "I understand why some people were offended by a comedians jokes last night. But those weren’t Trump’s words. They were jokes by an insult comic who offends virtually everyone, all the time….. because that is what insult comedians do."



The 'joke' could have political impact in a key state

Puerto Ricans living on the island don’t get to vote in the presidential election. But Boricuas living on the mainland do — and in Pennsylvania, a pivotal state in this year’s race, they wield significant clout.

Sponsor Message

According to UCLA’s Latino Policy and Politics Institute, about 580,000 Latinos in Pennsylvania can vote in this election — and most of them are Puerto Rican.

Unidos US Action Fund said it would work to amplify the issue in the swing states Pennsylvania, Arizona and Nevada as it works to get out the Latino vote.

"This level of disrespect toward Puerto Ricans and Latinos at large is unconscionable and, more importantly, a reminder that when people show you who they are, believe them," said Rafael Collazo, executive director of the group, in a statement.

After Hurricane Maria hit the island in 2017, Trump questioned the death toll and fought with San Juan’s mayor over the federal response to the disaster. During a visit to the island after the storm, he infamously threw rolls of paper towels into a group of people at a church collecting supplies.

On Monday, the Harris campaign cut a new television ad with the comedian's comments superimposed over images of the island after 2017's Hurricane Maria and footage of Trump throwing rolls of paper towels into a group of people at a church collecting supplies.

Harris told reporters she was proud to have the support of Bad Bunny and Jennifer Lopez, and said Trump's rally was an example of how he has divided the country.

"Donald Trump spends full time trying to have Americans point their finger at each other, fans the fuel of hate and division. And that’s why people are exhausted with him," Harris said.

It was a message that former President Barack Obama echoed at a rally for Harris in Philadelphia, as he decried the “island of garbage” line from the MSG rally.

“These are fellow citizens he’s talking about,” Obama said. “Here in Philadelphia, they are your neighbors, they are your friends, they are your co-workers, they go to school with your kids. These are Americans. ”
I am delighted to inform you that all monsters are gay.

Zombies are gay. Werewolves are gay. Godzilla is gay. Vampires are obviously gay. Mothman is gay, as are all other cryptids. Frankenstein is gay in, like, 20 different ways. The Babadook, you may have heard, is gay. Swamp Thing is trans, and also gay.

The queerness here is not so much about whom the monsters sleep with—I don’t want to picture the Babadook getting busy, and neither do you—as it is about the queer community’s enthusiastic adoption of monsters, cryptids, and other weird little guys as beloved avatars. The cultural role of the monster, according to monster studies scholarship (a real thing), is to embody and enforce the distinction between what is acceptable and what is aberrant: The monster lurks around in the no-man’s-land outside what the dominant culture deems normal, in order to remind you what happens when you stray. Queer horror and queer monstrousness turn this warning on its head. If the monster inhabits the same borderlands as you, if you see yourself reflected in the monster, then maybe the monster is your friend—and possibly your kin.

It’s not just queer folks who have embraced monsters and monstrousness, pulling power from what was once considered strange or different. My book Women and Other Monsters is about how women and feminized people can look to the monsters of classical mythology, intended as cautionary tales about overstepping our boundaries, as guides for reclaiming the unbecoming traits we’re supposed to suppress. Looking at Medusa, the hideous woman with snakes for hair, might turn the viewer to stone, but there’s power in offending the eye—or at least rejecting the pressure to be decorative. Charybdis, a mythical female sea monster, is often depicted as a bottomless sucking whirlpool, but there’s power in accepting your hunger, whether it’s for food or love or armies crossing the sea in boats.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Also in the field of women’s monstrosity, there’s Madeline Miller’s Circe and other contemporary feminist retellings, fiction that rehabilitates female villains of legend and literature, from Lady Macbeth to Baba Yaga to Japanese yokai. Memoirs like Riva Lehrer’s Golem Girl, about spina bifida, and Jami Lin Nakamura’s The Night Parade, about mental illness, use monsters and monstrosity to discuss disability.

In short, cultures create monster stories to establish what’s normative within that culture. But there has undeniably been a recent movement among marginalized people to identify as monstrous—or at least to identify with the monstrous—as a way to celebrate stepping outside the borders of acceptability. The old world is dying, the new world struggles to be born, now is a time for looking at monsters and saying: “Me as hell.”

Advertisement

An even more interesting thing happens when you focus on these marginal characters—these outsiders, who are supposed to have been banished to the borders. Putting the monster at the center means relegating the center—the normative—to the margins. And once we recenter the figures on the edge, the putative center becomes distant and defamiliarized, stripped of its protective sheen of conformity in a way that makes its true freakishness visible. This is why, in addition to revisiting old stories to recontextualize the villainy of the monstrous characters, we’ve also increasingly seen new stories that show white supremacy, patriarchy, and other elements of the dominant culture as the monstrous figures they’ve really been all along. Book examples include Ring Shout, by P. Djèlí Clark, in which the KKK is made up of literal monsters; The City We Became, by N.K. Jemisin, a cosmic horror novel in which the infiltrating Elder God figure is a metaphor for gentrification; and Manhunt, by Gretchen Felker-Martin, a gender apocalypse in which cis men become beasts and TERFs become monstrous murderers. In TV and movies, there are the racist horrors of Lovecraft Country and the moral monstrosity of the body-snatching colonizers in Get Out.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

This recentering affects the stories we tell—but it also affects our broader social story, the way we make sense of the world around us. (This is why people who want to control the way you think start by controlling what you’re allowed to read, view, and share. A culture and its products are reflections of each other.) We tell stories like this because we have entered an era in which the erstwhile cultural default—whiteness, maleness, cishetness, Christianity—is starting to erode. Those factors still dominate in the halls of power, but in the stories we tell, they’re no longer the presumptive starting point. Many popular and influential stories center the marginal figures who were previously banished to the monstrous borderlands—and some of them look back on the former center and go, “What the hell was happening there?”

Which brings me to “Republicans are weird.”

Advertisement

You probably don’t need me to recap this for you; it was one of the biggest news cycles of the year, after all. But in brief: Kamala Harris’ vice presidential candidate, Tim Walz, kicked off a trend—and perhaps secured his spot on the Harris team—by describing J.D. Vance and other Republicans as “weird” for their obsession with invading privacy, constraining rights, making up people to get mad at, and, of course, pushing antiquated and illiberal visions of a Christian nationalist idyll, with a white male overclass enforcing its dominance by any means necessary.

Advertisement

Advertisement

As New York Times columnist Lydia Polgreen has pointed out, calling these kinds of policy proposals “weird” verges on malignant understatement. It’s a suspiciously gentle word for, say, mandating genital inspections for school-age children, or outright lying to stoke racial animus—to choose just a couple of examples from a depressingly vast slate of options. If you’ve read even a summary of the fully dystopian Project 2025 playbook, which Vance once praised as an “essential weapon” for the “fights that lay ahead,” the term weird feels almost like an apologia. We’re calling this weird? The thing Al Yankovic is? Surely stronger language is necessary!

Advertisement

Advertisement

But calling MAGA Republicans weird also seems to really bug them. It gets under their skin—more than fascist or Nazi, which some of them are going so far as to embrace wholesale (at least on porn forums). “They’re the weird ones. Nobody’s ever called me weird. I’m a lot of things, but weird I’m not,” Trump protested this summer. “And he’s not either, I will tell you. J.D. is not at all.”

Clearly, to dismiss these ideological tyrants as “weird” seizes back their most treasured possession: the ability to dictate who is normal and who is deviant. This is key to their vision, which puts people like them—the more like them the better—at the center of society and drives others to the margins. The margins being, of course, where the monsters live.

Advertisement

Republicans in leadership, and many of their fans, have historically been able to shrug off accusations of moral grotesquery because they are safely installed in their cocoon of conformity; the monsters must be the other guys, the ones outside the boundaries. They’ve desperately insulated themselves against divergence, seizing the center and installing themselves as the arbiters of what’s natural and correct, in order to avoid ever having to face the reality of their own warped principles. To call them weird, to banish them to the monstrous hinterlands, is to claw back the ability to define whether behavior is prosocial or antisocial, to determine what principles we should be conforming to. Who gets to decide what “normal” is? Probably most Americans would say: Not people who want to monitor your menstruation.

Advertisement

So what does this mean for monstrosity in 2024 and beyond? It had become a badge of honor, a symbolic identity so many of us have learned to wear with pride. But as the normal and the deviant continue to swap places, our cultural monsters—the ones we create, and the ones we hold a mirror up to—continue to raise questions of where we situate decency, what we canonize, and what we try to exorcise. It’s fun for monsters to be gay, but at the same time … gay is actually an extremely normal thing to be! Way more normal than getting frothy and tyrannical about other people’s sexual and emotional lives. There’s power in embracing the monstrousness laid upon you as a person on the margins. But there’s also power in reflecting it right back where it belongs.
Remarks made at Trump rally backfire. And, Yankees aim for World Series comeback

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.



Today's top stories

Former President Donald Trump made a final appeal to the nation in front of a full crowd at Madison Square Garden last night after more than four hours of guest speaker appearances. The first guest, comedian and podcaster Tony Hinchcliffe joked that Puerto Rico is a “floating island of garbage.” One speaker seemed to imply that Vice President Harris is a prostitute.

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

🎧 NPR’s Danielle Kurtzleben tells Up First there is a stark contrast between Harris’ and Trump’s current message. Harris is highlighting women who have lost their lives or had their lives threatened by the overturning of Roe v. Wade. On the other hand, one of Trump’s openers made a joke about Taylor Swift being killed by her boyfriend. This isn’t a winning message for women voters — a demographic Trump is behind in the polls for, Kurtzleben says. As the end of his campaign nears, he is still rolling out new proposals including a tax credit for people caring for family members.

Harris is highlighting women who have lost their lives or had their lives threatened by the overturning of Roe v. Wade. On the other hand, one of Trump’s openers made a joke about Taylor Swift being killed by her boyfriend. This isn’t a winning message for women voters — a demographic Trump is behind in the polls for, Kurtzleben says. As the end of his campaign nears, he is still rolling out new proposals including a tax credit for people caring for family members. ➡️ Harris promoted a new pledge to boost Puerto Rico’s economy yesterday, contrasting the messages made at Trump’s rally. Megastar Bad Bunny highlighted the pledge to his 45 million Instagram followers.

Sponsor Message

Today, high-ranking South Korean officials are expected to present NATO allies with evidence about North Korean soldiers showing up in Russia to fight in Ukraine. This comes after U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin confirmed he believes at least 3,000 North Korean soldiers are in Russia, calling it a very serious escalation. Today’s briefing aims to get all 32 NATO allies on the same page.



🎧 One of South Korea’s concerns is North Korean troops getting battlefield experience, something they haven’t had since 1953, NPR’s Teri Schultz says. Nobody knows what else Russia and North Korea could be exchanging, such as ballistic missiles. NATO can issue a statement about how this cooperation is unacceptable but it doesn’t have the authority to tell North Korea and Russia what to do. South Korean intelligence will also brief European Union officials and the country has the ability to impose sanctions.

The 2024 World Series is coming to the East Coast. After the Los Angeles Dodgers won the first two games, the New York Yankees will now host games three and four and, if necessary, game five. The Dodgers' Shohei Ohtani hurt himself in game two trying to steal second base, but the team’s manager Dave Roberts told reporters yesterday that Ohtani has gotten back his normal range of motion and is expected to play.



Sponsor Message

🎧 “Historically teams that win the first two games, not a surprise, go on to win the series more often than not — 80% of the time,” NPR freelance reporter Steve Futterman says. But teams have come back from 0-2 deficits many times. In fact, the last two times these two teams faced off in the World Series in 1981 and 1978 that’s exactly what happened.

Deep dive

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

Pennsylvania is one of the largest election battleground prizes for a presidential candidate. The state's 19 electoral votes will likely decide the road to victory. With just days until the election, Harris and Trump have been barnstorming the state to rally support. To see how their messages are resonating with residents, Morning Edition hosts Michel Martin and Steve Inskeep each led teams across the state to speak to voters in Pittsburgh, Gettysburg, Allentown, Philadelphia and more. The Pennsylvanians they spoke to reflect a divided electorate: Some are inspired by Harris’ vision while others believe in Trump’s economic policies. And, there were some who weren’t sure about their candidate. Here’s what they told us.



Stress less

Maria Fabrizio for NPR

Stress Less

is a new series from NPR that will help you find your calm. Subscribe to the

Stress Less newsletter

series for more powerful tools and strategies to help reduce anxiety and improve feelings of well-being.

Internal Family Systems, or “parts work,” has surged in popularity. It's the idea that we all have multiple parts, like sub-personalities. According to Richard Schwartz's book No Bad Parts, getting to know our multiple parts better and treating them with compassion may help better manage our lives and stress. Various studies have shown IFS can benefit people with specific problems, including symptoms of PTSD and stress; the pain, discomfort and depression from living with rheumatoid arthritis; and depression. Here’s how it works:



Sponsor Message

🧠 Start by listening to your parts. Tune in to one sensation or image and ask it what it wants you to know.

Tune in to one sensation or image and ask it what it wants you to know. 🧠 Try starting a dialogue with your parts: What do you want me to know? What do you want to show me?

What do you want me to know? What do you want to show me? 🧠 IFS teaches that we all have exile parts , which hold onto hurtful memories. These exiles can stay locked deep within, but reliving those experiences can help with unburdening.

, which hold onto hurtful memories. These exiles can stay locked deep within, but reliving those experiences can help with unburdening. 🧠 If you engage in negative self-talk, use the U-Turn technique: Take a moment to notice what’s happening inside and look inward.

See the complete list of how the IFS process works.



3 things to know before you go

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.
is a senior correspondent at Vox, where he focuses on the Supreme Court, the Constitution, and the decline of liberal democracy in the United States. He received a JD from Duke University and is the author of two books on the Supreme Court.

Support independent journalism that matters — become a Vox Member.

On October 23, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled that many voters who cast a mailed-in ballot improperly, thus rendering their vote “void,” should be allowed to cast a ballot on Election Day that will actually be counted. Though it’s hard to pin down exactly how many voters will be impacted by this decision, it’s likely that thousands of Pennsylvanians will regain their ability to vote in the November election if the state supreme court’s decision remains in effect.

The case, which was known as Genser v. Butler County Board of Elections when it was decided by the state supreme court, involves a genuinely difficult legal question that required the state’s justices to resolve a conflict between two competing legal principles. It split them 4-3, with four Democrats forming the majority and two Republicans and one Democrat in dissent.

On Monday, the Republican Party asked the US Supreme Court to intervene and effectively disenfranchise the thousands of voters who will be allowed to vote if the state court’s Genser decision stands. That alone is a very big deal. If the 2024 presidential election is very close, as is expected, and if victory comes down to which candidate wins Pennsylvania, a US Supreme Court decision in favor of the GOP could flip the winner of this election from Kamala Harris to Donald Trump. (Although more Republicans are expected to vote by mail than in 2020, Democrats likely still have an advantage with this cohort.)

But this case could also have massive implications for US democracy that extend far beyond the 2024 election, even if Harris wins in a landslide.

State supreme courts are supposed to be the final word on all questions of state law. The ultimate authority on the question in Genser has spoken, and the US Supreme Court ought to butt out. Nevertheless, the GOP argues that the high Court needs to get involved because of something known as the “independent state legislature doctrine” (ISLD), a chaotic legal theory that the Supreme Court has rejected many times over the last century.

If the justices accept the GOP’s arguments, they will introduce unprecedented chaos into US elections, putting in doubt which officials are responsible for election law — and even whether voters or their elected officials get to decide who wins in elections.

SCOTUS, Explained Get the latest developments on the US Supreme Court from senior correspondent Ian Millhiser. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

The independent state legislature doctrine would destabilize the United States and threaten its security

In its strongest form, the ISLD claims that each state’s legislative branch has exclusive authority to determine how federal elections are conducted in that state. That means that a state governor cannot veto laws governing federal elections, even if the state constitution typically allows the governor to veto bills passed by the legislature. It means that states cannot alter their election laws through ballot initiatives or referendums. It means that state courts cannot enforce state constitutional provisions that protect the right to vote. And it even calls into question state court decisions interpreting state election laws.

In Genser, the Republican Party doesn’t go to any of those extremes. But they do claim that by interpreting Pennsylvania law to permit the impacted voters to cast a ballot on Election Day, the state supreme court robbed the state legislature of its supposedly exclusive authority to write election laws.

But even in its weaker forms, the ISLD is dangerous. The last time an independent state legislature doctrine case was before the Court, in Moore v. Harper (2023), an array of conservative luminaries and former top national security officials warned the justices to stay far, far away from the ISLD, lest they destabilize America’s entire system for choosing its leaders. That included a brief on behalf of retired admirals, generals, and service secretaries — some of whom held high-level political appointments in Republican administrations — who warned that the ISLD “undermines election integrity and exacerbates both domestic and foreign threats to national security.”

For the most part, the Court heeded these warnings in Moore. Although Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Brett Kavanaugh had both expressed sympathy for the ISLD in the past, they largely reversed course in Moore — joining four of their colleagues in an opinion that mostly rejected this legal doctrine.

But Moore was not a total victory for democracy.

Historically, each state’s highest court has had the final word on all questions of state law. The US Supreme Court can intervene if a state violates federal law, or if a state supreme court hands down a decision that violates the US Constitution. But if a state supreme court interprets its own state’s law in a way that the federal justices don’t like, they are supposed to shut up and accept that they don’t have any power over a state’s internal self-governance.

Roberts’s majority opinion in Moore, however, included a cryptic line creating an exception to the rule that state courts have the final word on questions of state law. “[S]tate courts,” Roberts wrote, “may not transgress the ordinary bounds of judicial review such that they arrogate to themselves the power vested in state legislatures to regulate federal elections.” Moore, however, did not explain what, exactly, it means to “transgress the ordinary bounds of judicial review.”

As a practical matter, that means that Moore gave the US Supreme Court an unprecedented new power to overrule state election law decisions that at least five justices don’t like. It also means that Moore shifted a great deal of authority to the Republican Party — Republicans have a 6-3 majority on the US Supreme Court and Moore means that any five of these Republicans can reverse a state court decision that benefits Democrats.

The question in Genser is whether the Republican justices will use this self-given power, for the first time, to give Donald Trump an unfair advantage in Pennsylvania.

So where does the ISLD come from?

The independent state legislature doctrine is one of those very bad ideas that rears its head every few decades, only to get shut down when it reaches the Supreme Court. The Court first rejected the ISLD in Davis v. Hildebrant (1916), which upheld a provision of the Ohio constitution permitting the people of the state to veto state election laws via a popular referendum, even though that meant blocking a law enacted by the state’s legislative branch. The Court also handed down significant decisions rejecting the ISLD in 1932 and in 2015.

A likely reason why this doctrine refuses to stay dead is that it actually sounds plausible if you read the text of the Constitution without doing any legal or historical research. One provision of the Constitution states that “the times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof.” Meanwhile, another provision says that presidential elections shall also be conducted in a way determined by the state legislature.

So the argument for the ISLD is deceptively simple: The Constitution states that the rules governing federal elections are set by a state’s “legislature.” Governors, state courts, and state constitutions are not part of the legislative branch of government. Therefore they have no say in how federal elections are conducted.

The problem with this argument is that it is anachronistic. When the Constitution was drafted, the concept of a popularly elected legislative body was a relatively new innovation, and the word “legislature” did not always refer to a body, like the US Congress, which was defined as the “legislative” branch of government. Instead, it meant, in the words of one 1828 dictionary, “the body of men in a state or kingdom, invested with power to make and repeal laws.”

Or, as the Supreme Court held in Arizona State Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission (2015), the word “legislature” refers to “the power that makes laws.” That power can be vested in a congress or parliament. But it can also be partially vested in a state governor (who has the power to veto laws), in a state supreme court (which has the power to interpret laws), or in the people of a state as a whole (who may have the power to make laws via ballot initiatives or referendums).

Proponents of the ISLD, in other words, aren’t actually trying to preserve a separation of powers that existed when the Constitution was written. They want to create an entirely novel regime that upends existing state constitutions and gives unprecedented power to a Republican Supreme Court.

What are the immediate stakes in Genser?

Even setting aside the long-term stakes in this case, Genser is a big deal solely because it could change the outcome of the 2024 presidential election — although the likelihood of such an outcome is difficult to predict because it turns on two unknown variables: 1) How much of an advantage will Democrats have over Republicans among Pennsylvanians who vote by mail? and 2) How many of these voters will be impacted by the Genser decision?

Genser arises out of a quirk of Pennsylvania law. In order to cast a mailed ballot, the voter must stuff their ballot inside two separate envelopes. The first, often referred to as the “outer envelope,” includes information that can identify the voter who cast a particular ballot. The second, known as the “secrecy envelope,” does not. Pennsylvania law, moreover, is unusually unforgiving to voters who do not properly stuff their ballot in this second envelope: In 2020, the state supreme court held that a ballot that is not properly stuffed is “void.”

The plaintiffs in Genser are two voters who previously attempted to vote by mail, but their ballots were canceled because they didn’t properly stuff them. The state then sent them an email informing them that their ballots were voided and advising them that “you can go to your polling place on election day and cast a provisional ballot.” Yet, when these two voters did exactly that, the state reversed course and decided not to count their provisional ballots after all.

It turns out that the legal question of whether a Pennsylvania voter who casts a voided mailed ballot may then vote via a provisional ballot is unusually difficult. On the one hand, Pennsylvania law states that a provisional ballot “shall not be counted” if the same voter’s “mail-in ballot is timely received by a county board of elections.” So that statutory language is certainly helpful to the Republican Party’s position in Genser.

On the other hand, the state supreme court previously held that ballots cast without the secrecy envelope are “void.” As the same court explains in its Genser opinion, something that is “void” must be given “no legal effect.” So, under this reading of Pennsylvania law, a mailed ballot that is submitted without a secrecy envelope must be treated as if it did not exist — and thus it cannot prevent the same voter from casting a provisional ballot.

Is that a persuasive argument? The honest answer is that this case split the court 4-3 for a reason. Both possible interpretations of state law are plausible, and a majority of the state’s justices decided to go with the option that is more consistent with democratic principles.

It’s difficult to estimate exactly how many voters could be impacted by Genser. An MIT investigation into this question found that “about 6.4 percent of the 3,086 mail ballots cast in the 2019 general election in Philadelphia were rejected for not being enclosed within a secrecy envelope.” But during the 2020 election, “massive voter-education efforts” successfully reduced this number. A Philadelphia spokesperson claimed that only 1.1 percent of mailed ballots were rejected for this reason in 2020, and this number was much lower in other parts of the state.

Still, even if you assume that only a quarter of Pennsylvania voters will cast a mailed ballot in 2024, which is probably a low estimate, and that only 1 percent of those votes will not properly stuff their ballot in the secrecy envelope, that’s still a whole lot of voters. In 2020, nearly 7 million people cast a presidential vote in Pennsylvania. So, if a quarter of ballots were mailed in and 1 percent of those were invalidated, that’s more than 17,000 votes tossed out.

How many of those tossed-out votes would be for Harris is unclear. Though Republican participation in mail-in voting is higher than it was in 2020, the mere fact that the GOP has taken the position it’s taken in Genser suggests they expect mailed ballots to favor Democrats, as was the case in 2020.

Realistically, preventing these voters from having their votes counted will not change the result of the 2024 election unless the whole thing comes down to Pennsylvania — and unless Harris leads Trump by only a few thousand ballots. But, in that scenario, a victory for the Republican Party in Genser would change the course of American history.
Here's where Harris and Trump stand on three big health care issues

toggle caption Charles Rex Arbogast/AP

As the 2024 election heads into its final weeks, the direction of policies affecting the health of millions of Americans is at stake.

The next president and Congress will have the power to put their mark on major health care programs like Medicare and Medicaid that combined cover nearly 150 million Americans. They’ll be able to direct resources for how the United States fights the drug overdose crisis and how the country prepares for the next pandemic.

A recent survey found that two-thirds of Americans say health care should be receiving more attention in the presidential campaign, and there are several crucial health policy choices the next president is likely to face in their first year. Here are the candidates views on three issues:

Sponsor Message

1. What’s the future of Medicare’s drug price negotiations?

The Biden-Harris Administration scored a historic win by giving Medicare the power to directly negotiate the prices of some of the most expensive prescription drugs. Federal health officials the first 10 negotiated prices take effect in 2026, patients and Medicare will save $7.5 billion all together.

Some high-ranking congressional Republicans want to repeal that authority, arguing that reducing drugmaker profits will shrink their incentive to develop the next blockbuster treatment. Several pharmaceutical companies have also sued the federal government, claiming that Medicare negotiating powers are unconstitutional.

Trump has not said if he supports repealing the law or whether he would continue to defend it in court. Stacie Dusetzina, a professor of health policy at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, says Medicare’s new authority is still vulnerable.

“Once you give Medicare beneficiaries improved benefits, it's really hard to take those away,” Dusetzina acknowledged. “But I think that because the negotiated prices won't go into effect until 2026, no one will miss them [if they are repealed].”

Harris has said on the campaign trail she wants Medicare to “accelerate the speed of negotiations so the prices of more drugs come down faster.” Experts believe that would likely mean either negotiating the price of more drugs, or beginning to bargain earlier in a drug’s lifetime. Either move would require congressional sign-off.

Harris’ campaign says she would invest any additional savings in new policy proposals, like expanding Medicare coverage for home health care. But a recent report from the Congressional Budget Office estimates that additional funds from such an effort would be minimal.

Sponsor Message

Dusetzina said it’s also unclear whether Harris’ plan would slow the pipeline for new drugs.

“I think it's worth being a little bit cautious about how big and broad you go immediately," she said. "I want to see, what does that mean for drug development? What does that mean for access for patients?"

Trump has not explained how his administration would run the negotiations. Health care experts note a Trump administration would have limited ability to undermine the law if it remained in place, because the rules direct Medicare which medications to pick for negotiation, and sets minimum discounts the government must seek.

2. Should Congress extend the Affordable Care Act’s enhanced subsidies?

For people who buy their own health insurance on the ACA marketplaces, the federal government covers a portion of the monthly health insurance premiums that many pay. Under the original law, lawmakers capped that assistance to individuals who made up to 400% of the federal poverty level – today that’s about $125,000 for a family of four.

Democrats in Congress removed the income cap in 2021 and increased the size of the subsidies. Consumers’ portion of their premiums have been nearly cut in half, according to the nonpartisan health research organization KFF. Since the subsidy increase, the number of people signing up for ACA coverage has nearly doubled to more than 21 million people.

These enhanced subsidies, as they’re called, are set to expire at the end of 2025. If that happens, KFF estimates monthly premiums for people with subsidized ACA plans would double in many states, and the Congressional Budget Office estimates that enrollment in ACA coverage would decline by 7 or 8 million people. (The CBO estimates about half of those people would instead get coverage through work.)

Vice President Harris says she wants to make these subsidies permanent, costing Washington an estimated $335 billion over the next decade. Former President Trump has not stated a position, but manyRepublicans, including former Trump officials, argue the benefit should expire.

Sponsor Message

Many Republicans point to a report issued this year by the conservative Paragon Health Institute that found as many as 5 million people misstated their incomes, potentially attempting to defraud the government and qualify for $0-premium health plans. According to Paragon, this activity cost taxpayers up to $26 billion.

Other health policy experts say there’s a less nefarious explanation. Cynthia Cox, a vice president with KFF said it can be very difficult, especially for people in many low-wage jobs, to forecast their annual earnings. What may look shady on paper may in reality be a best guess gone wrong.

“It might depend on how many tips you get, or how many rides you pick up, or how many shifts you work,” Cox said. “So that's where I think there's some important nuance to consider, like, is this really fraud or not?”

There are provisions in the law, Cox added, to force people to pay back all or part of their subsidy if their estimate was incorrect.

Michael Cannon, the director of health policy at the libertarian Cato Institute, blames the subsidies for fostering another form of fraud – perpetrated by insurance brokers. Federal health officials have received 275,000 complaints this year about brokers signing people up for Obamacare coverage without their consent. Brokers receive a commission for every person they enroll in coverage, and consumers who don’t have to pay a monthly premium may be less likely to notice a change in their insurance.

“If more enrollees had to pay at least a little something in order to enroll in these plans, that would check a lot of this unscrupulous behavior by brokers,” Cannon said.

Federal officials have suspended 850 brokers, proposed new rules to crack down on unscrupulous broker behavior and have resolved nearly all complaints.

3. Will medication abortion remain available?

Nearly two-thirds of abortions in the U.S. are now medication abortions, typically involving a regimen of two pills – mifepristone and misoprostol. In June, the U.S. Supreme Court dismissed an attempt by anti-abortion advocates to strike down the Food and Drug Administration’s long-standing approval of and expanded access to mifepristone. But, depending on the election, new leaders at the FDA could move to restrict (or further expand) access to medication abortion.

Sponsor Message

Under the Biden-Harris administration, the FDA has allowed doctors to prescribe mifepristone to any patient via telehealth instead of requiring patients to see a provider in-person. Telehealth prescriptions now enable 1 in 5 abortions in the U.S., and Harris has made protecting and expanding abortion access a centerpiece of her campaign.

Trump has flip-flopped. On some occasions the former president has said he would not restrict access, and on others that he would be open to federal restrictions. Project 2025, the conservative governing blueprint authored by former Trump officials and other close advisers, calls for the FDA to withdraw its approval of mifepristone.

“I think a lot of people don't know that we can trust what he's saying because it's consistently different,” said Ederlina Co, an associate professor of law at the University of the Pacific.

If a Trump administration did restrict or cut off access to mifepristone, people could still have medication abortions using just the other pill, misoprostol. Misoprostol used alone is safe and effective but can have more side effects.

Uncertainty around Trump’s health policy

Harris' position on these three issues are clear. She supports expanding ACA enhanced subsidies. She backs medication abortion and would like to hit the gas on Medicare drug negotiations.

It’s more difficult to guess what would happen to health policy under a second Trump administration because he has not taken public positions on many major issues.

“When former President Trump describes his plans, the language is often so general that it's hard to read into it,” said KFF’s Cox.

For example, until recently one of Trump’s clearest positions on prescription drug prices was the “most favored nation” policy he put forward late in his first term. It would have forced drugmakers to sell certain drugs to Medicare at rates paid by other countries.

Sponsor Message

Within the last few weeks, Trump’s campaign told Politico and Stat that the former president would not revive the policy in a second term.

Beyond that now-dropped policy, Ben Ippolito, a health economist at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, said it’s “a little bit harder to predict” how Trump would tackle health care.

This story comes from the health policy news organization Tradeoffs. Ryan Levi is a reporter/producer for the show, where a version of this story first appeared. You can listen here:
is a senior correspondent at Vox, where he focuses on the Supreme Court, the Constitution, and the decline of liberal democracy in the United States. He received a JD from Duke University and is the author of two books on the Supreme Court.

Andrew Oldham, a Trump judge on the US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, chats with other judges and lawyer before a panel at the Federalist Society’s 2022 National Lawyers Convention. Shuran Huang for the Washington Post via Getty Images

On Friday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit handed down an astoundingly poorly reasoned opinion claiming it is illegal for a state to count a ballot mailed before Election Day but that arrives for counting afterward. Eighteen states, plus the District of Columbia, currently count at least some late-arriving ballots.

The opinion in Republican National Committee v. Wetzel is difficult to parse. Important sections of it appear to be missing several paragraphs, as the decision makes logical leaps without explaining key concepts. It reaches some of its central conclusions without citing a legal authority — whether statute, case law, or otherwise — to support those conclusions. If this opinion were submitted as part of a law school exam, the student would risk a failing grade.

SCOTUS, Explained Get the latest developments on the US Supreme Court from senior correspondent Ian Millhiser. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Any decision that would toss out lawfully cast ballots is worrisome, especially in a nation that tends to hold very close presidential elections, as the 2024 election seems on track to be. Because Democrats are expected to cast mail-in ballots more often than Republicans this year, if the Fifth Circuit’s decision were in effect, it could hand states that Democratic nominee Kamala Harris won to Republican Donald Trump.

That said, the one good thing about the Wetzel opinion is that the Fifth Circuit didn’t give it immediate effect, so it is very unlikely to impact the current election. Still, there are two good reasons to be troubled that a federal appeals court handed down such a cocamamie decision.

One, is that Wetzel is emblematic of the many bad election decisions we can expect to be handed down in the coming days. Elections always bring litigation, as the two parties jockey for legal advantage in state and federal court. This time around, however, the federal courts are controlled by Republicans — some of whom, including the judges on the Wetzel case — have a strong reputation for partisanship.

And that brings us to the second reason to worry about Wetzel. The three judges involved in the case, Kyle Duncan, James Ho, and Andy Oldham, are widely viewed as potential Supreme Court nominees if Trump becomes president again — certainly, the three of them have all auditioned very hard for such a promotion.

So, while it’s unlikely that the current Supreme Court will endorse Oldham’s majority opinion in Wetzel, his work is representative of the type of legal reasoning that could come from the Court if Trump were to fill it with MAGA loyalists who will sign onto virtually anything the Republican Party wants.

The Fifth Circuit has a well-deserved reputation for handing down outlandishly reasoned opinions that reach far-right conclusions, and that are frequently reversed even by the current GOP-controlled Supreme Court. The Fifth Circuit has become a popular place for far-right lawyers who lose at trial to appeal their cases. The Fifth Circuit hears nearly all federal appeals that originate from Louisiana, Mississippi, or Texas, and MAGA-aligned judges like Duncan, Ho, and Oldham control a majority of the court’s active judgeships.

Of course, there’s always some risk that this Supreme Court, which has a 6-3 Republican majority, could affirm even the worst decisions from the Fifth Circuit. This is, after all, the same Supreme Court that recently held that Trump was allowed to commit crimes while in office. But Oldham’s Wetzel’s opinion is so poorly reasoned, and the Fifth Circuit’s record before the Supreme Court is so abysmal, it’s hard to imagine more than three of the current justices endorsing Oldham’s crusade against late-arriving ballots.

Every presidential election brings a wave of lawsuits, and some of them are potentially quite worrying. For example, I’m keeping a close eye on a case seeking to disenfranchise several thousand voters in the key swing state of Pennsylvania.

But for every case that’s worth stressing over, there are likely to be several decisions like Wetzel, which are unlikely to amount to anything unless Trump gets to start filling Supreme Court seats with judges like Oldham. If one were to worry about every single pro-Republican court decision that we are likely to see in the next several weeks, it would be easy to drive yourself mad — and for no good reason.

The Wetzel opinion is really, really, really, bad

Oldham’s Wetzel opinion is only 22 pages, but it reads like it is much longer because it is so disjointed — switching topics so frequently it’s hard to keep track of his argument.

That said, the crux of his opinion is that an 1872 law providing that federal elections shall take place on “the Tuesday next after the 1st Monday in November, in every even numbered year” prohibits states from counting any ballots that arrive after this day — and that somehow no one noticed this fact for the last 152 years.

Oldham’s analysis on several key parts of his argument is quite brief. At one point, he cites a Supreme Court opinion stating that an election cannot take place without some kind of action by government officials. He then argues it somehow follows that a ballot is not officially “cast” until it arrives at the state election office. Here is the extent of Oldham’s argument on this point:

The State’s problem is that it thinks a ballot can be “cast” before it is received. What if a State changes its law to allow voters to mark their ballots. and place them in a drawer? Or what if a State allowed a voter to mark a ballot and then post a picture on social media? The hypotheticals are obviously absurd. But it should be equally obvious that a ballot is “cast” when the State takes custody of it.

As I said, the opinion is difficult to parse, but Oldham appears to be arguing that states cannot give any legal significance to the fact that a voter mailed their ballot before Election Day because, if states were allowed to do that, they may also allow voters to “cast” a ballot by stuffing it in the voter’s own dresser drawer.

Elsewhere in the opinion, Oldham points to the Supreme Court’s opinion in Foster v. Love (1997), which held that Louisiana could not effectively hold its congressional election in October. Early voting, absentee ballots, and other mechanisms that allow a voter to cast a ballot in October are allowed. But the final result of an election, according to Foster, “may not be consummated prior to federal election day.”

Fair enough, but Oldham’s opinion then leaps to the conclusion that an election is “consummated” when election officials know the specific number of ballots that will need to be counted to determine the winner, and that this consummation cannot occur after congressionally defined Election Day. He cites no legal sources whatsoever to support this proposition. Nor does he explain where this idea comes from. Oldham appears to have made it up.

I could go on, but what’s the point? Oldham’s opinion is so thinly reasoned on many of its essential points that I fear that, merely by trying to explain his reasoning, I’m placing far more flesh on the Fifth Circuit’s bare-bones argument than the opinion actually does.

That said, there is exactly one part of the Wetzel opinion that fans of the rule of law can look upon with relief. At the end of the opinion, the Fifth Circuit decides not to issue an immediate injunction preventing states from counting late-arriving ballots (and even if it did issue such an order, it would only apply in Mississippi, which is the sole state before the Fifth Circuit in this case). Instead, Oldham sends the case back down to a trial court “for further proceedings to fashion appropriate relief.”

As a practical matter, that means that this decision will almost certainly have no impact on the 2024 election. It could hypothetically be affirmed by the Supreme Court, and thus would govern all future elections in all 50 states, but that seems unlikely unless someone is actually able to come up with a legal argument that supports Oldham’s conclusion.

Still, while it’s hard to imagine even this Supreme Court embracing Oldham’s swiss-cheese-like reasoning, the case does carry a warning about the 2024 election. Duncan, Ho, and Oldham are all widely considered to be part of Trump’s short list of potential Supreme Court nominees, and all three of them have certainly auditioned for the part.

If Trump wins, in other words, weakly reasoned opinions tossing out ballots for no particular reason could easily become the norm.
is a senior politics reporter at Vox, where he covers the Democratic Party. He joined Vox in 2022 after reporting on national and international politics for the Atlantic’s politics, global, and ideas teams, including the role of Latino voters in the 2020 election.

Former President Donald Trump is reflected off a window as he speaks at a campaign rally at Madison Square Garden on October 27, 2024, in New York City. Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

What drives Donald Trump and his movement’s belief in voter fraud and election denialism?

Of course there’s the superficial, and obvious, layer: a sense of aggrievement, a desire for retribution from a man known for never admitting a loss, and a movement that believes him unequivocally. There’s also a slightly deeper ideological sense — frustration from a political party unable to accomplish its policy goals because of an electoral loss. But at the core, research and political theorists (including my colleague Zack Beauchamp) argue, there’s an outright sense of racism and bigotry — the reactionary animus of a conservative white majority losing its grip on power, is radicalizing against democracy in a bid to hold on, and leverages voter fraud as a way to explain this change.

In that context, the extreme misogynistic and racist speech on display at Trump’s Sunday night rally in Madison Square Garden was no coincidence. It happened as speaker after speaker warned about the threats nonwhite people pose to the country and its elections.

There was Steven Miller, the extreme anti-immigration hawk, warning that Trump is fighting a system trying to “take away your voice, take away your vote, to take away your right to have your own country.” To vote for Trump is to protect American identity, he said: “America is for Americans and Americans only!” (“America is for Americans” was also used as a KKK slogan in the 1920s.)

There was Tucker Carlson, the far-right former Fox News anchor, warning about a “leadership class” that “despises” Trump supporters’ “values and their history and their culture and their customs, [and] really hates them to the point that it’s trying to replace them.”

And there was Donald Trump Jr. claiming that the Democrats, “rather than cater to Americans,” think “it would just be easier to replace them with people who will be reliable voters.”

These remarks don’t just echo the far-right “Great Replacement” conspiracy theory — they update the GOP’s stolen election narrative with a new villain. While in 2020 it was “urban” voters who were coded as the primary perpetrators of voter fraud, in 2024 it’s immigrants and noncitizens who are the avatars for fraud and would be blamed for another Trump loss.

Trump has made that claim for years (blaming his 2016 loss of the popular vote and 2020 loss in Arizona on noncitizens voting). But this time, it seems, those claims are much more mainstream.

Back in September, during the first and only presidential debate between Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump made plain who he would blame for an electoral loss in November. “Our elections are bad,” he said. “And a lot of these illegal immigrants coming in, they’re trying to get them to vote. They can’t even speak English, they don’t know what country they’re in practically, and these people are trying to get them to vote, and that’s why they’re allowing them to come into our country.”

The deep underpinnings of the MAGA movement’s ugly voter fraud rhetoric

An array of Republican members of Congress, GOP activists, and state officials espouse similar beliefs about voter fraud to those promulgated on stage Sunday night, as do a significant proportion of voters — some 85 percent of Trump supporters are concerned about noncitizen voting. Those beliefs, research and polling suggest, correlate with a sense of racial resentment and fearmongering about a quickly diversifying country that tends to over-index among Trump voters.

In studies and research conducted this summer by the Brennan Center for Justice’s Kevin T. Morris and Tennessee State University’s Ian Shapiro, the authors found a strong correlation between belief and talk of voter fraud in the 2020 election and racialized rhetoric. They found that predominantly Black cities were the focal point of right-wing voter fraud discourse in 2020, as opposed to multicultural or majority white cities; that electoral confidence declined the most among “racially resentful whites” after 2020; and that these “racially resentful white Americans” were especially likely to believe in voter fraud now.

They argue that dynamic exists because these racialized accusations of fraud serve a function for these Americans: They allow them to preserve their sense of superiority over nonwhite Americans and continue to support democracy in theory, while still rejecting electoral outcomes that they don’t agree with. In this way, racialized talk of voter fraud serves a purpose for elites as well.

“By focusing accusations of election fraud on Black individuals and municipalities, elites made their claims more believable to a white audience,” Morris and Shapiro write. “White Americans were more susceptible to these narratives precisely because they leveraged manufactured associations between electoral malfeasance and race.”

In other words, racialized talk of voter fraud exploits white anxiety and fear of change, while reinforcing a political position that boosts the conservative elites who make these accusations.

Under this theory, the arguments that Trump and his allies are making this year make a lot more sense. Per polling out of Michigan State University, Trump voters in this cycle, at least in Michigan, are much more likely to say that the country is “changing too fast, undermining traditional values” than they were in 2016, when researchers first found a strong correlation between aversion to social change and a vote for Trump.

That dividing line is growing even clearer now, with voters who told pollsters that “by accepting diverse cultures and lifestyles, our country is steadily improving” aligning sharply in favor of Harris.

That schism poses a threat to a multiracial, multicultural, pluralistic society.

“At a time when America’s multiracial democracy appears fragile, groups poised to lose power draw on rote narratives linking race and criminality to legitimize their own denial of free and fair elections,” Morris and Shapiro argue.

And on Sunday night, Trump yet again reminded the world he thinks this divide is beneficial.

“For the past nine years, we have been fighting against the most sinister and corrupt forces on Earth,” he bellowed. “With your vote in this election, you could show them once and for all that this nation does not belong to them. This nation belongs to you. It belongs to you.”
In his latest online column, NBC News’ Chuck Todd noted that the “fundamentals” in the 2024 presidential race continue to favor Donald Trump. A week earlier, New York magazine’s Jon Chait noted that, all things considered, Kamala Harris “ought to be losing.”

I think these assessments are correct, but more importantly, they got me thinking about the degree to which the public considers “fundamentals” when looking at the 2024 contest.

For those watching the White House race closely, there’s obviously an enormous amount of attention on the candidates, their priorities, their visions, their backgrounds and the pitches they’re making to the electorate. It’s tempting to think these are — or at least should be — the only things that matter: Voters are considering appeals from two profoundly different candidates offering two wildly different directions for the nation’s future.

But many political scientists will tell you there’s more to it than that.

For a moment, put aside what you know about Harris, Trump and what they bring to the table. Temporarily disregard the specific personalities and platforms. Forget about the latest ads, the debate performances and the day-to-day developments. Instead, consider the race from 30,000 feet.

What we see is an angry electorate, thoroughly dissatisfied with the status quo. CNN’s Harry Enten had a good piece on this earlier this month:

A minority of Americans have historically said that the country is heading in the right direction, but it’s usually not as bad as the current figures. Only about 28% of Americans believe the country is on the right track these days, according to the latest NBC News poll. That’s well below where things were when Joe Biden took office in 2021, when that percentage was well north of 40%. Indeed, 28% is not where a president’s party wants to be a month before the election — whether the incumbent is running or not. Since 1980, in elections won by the incumbent’s party, an average of 42% of Americans have said that the country was on the right track.

When we talk about “fundamentals,” this is what we’re getting at. In broad strokes, when Americans believe the economy is awful, crime rates are high, and the country is wildly off-track, they tend to vote against the White House’s incumbent party.

To be sure, the economy isn’t awful; crimes rates are down; and the country is not wildly off-track, but for the purposes of understanding what’s likely to happen in an election, impressions — to my great chagrin — offer greater insights than reality.

It’s why, on paper, Harris looks like such an underdog: She’s the vice president working alongside an unpopular incumbent in a year in which much of the electorate wants something very different from what they have.

Joe Biden’s disapproval rating is much higher than his approval rating. When was the last time a political party won a national race when the incumbent president was this far underwater?

Never. Since the dawn of modern polling, it has literally never happened.

Taking this discussion about fundamentals one step further, the aforementioned Enten piece added, “Gallup listed 10 different metrics it looks at heading into an election, ranging from party identification to satisfaction with the economy to presidential approval. Eight of those 10 were deemed to be good for Trump. The other two were neutral. None of the 10 hinted in the direction of a Harris victory.”

So, why is the race so close? In part because Harris is running an excellent campaign with a compelling message, and in part because Trump is an erratic criminal, who has already failed once at being president, running on an unpopular and authoritarian platform.

Or put another way, the fundamentals might benefit the GOP ticket, but there are relevant variables that might yet keep Trump out of the White House.
Pennsylvania voters are complicated. We drove around the state talking to them

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

With 19 electoral votes, Pennsylvania is the largest battleground prize — meaning the road to victory most likely runs through here.

Just days before the election, both Vice President Harris and former President Trump are barnstorming the state to rally support. The state was decided by about a percentage point in 2020, and the vote expected to be close again.

To see how the candidates' messages are resonating, Morning Edition hosts Michel Martin and Steve Inskeep each led teams across Pennsylvania, stopping in Pittsburgh, Gettysburg, Allentown, Philadelphia and other towns to talk with voters.

The Pennsylvanians we met reflect a divided electorate. Some are voting for Harris, inspired by her vision that they say represents stability for them and because they want to see a woman as president. Others are voting for Trump because they believe in his economic policies and promises. And a few weren’t so sure about either candidate.

Sponsor Message

These are some of the people we met along the way.

At a fracking wastewater disposal site outside Pittsburgh, Ben Wallace shared his frustrations with industry regulations and why he’s voting for Trump.

We met Wallace at a site in New Kensington owned by Penneco Environmental Solutions, where he serves as its chief operating officer. Large tanker trucks full of recovered water used during fracking drove onto the site as we spoke. The water is treated and injected deep under the earth’s surface — a controversial practice due to concerns about water contamination.

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

Wallace denies that the practice is unsafe and doesn’t believe in human-caused climate change. He argues that industry regulations added over decades have led to hundreds of thousands in additional costs to his business and he believes Trump would be friendlier to the industry.

“This is kind of an argument I give to environmental activists all the time. Show me the industry. You know, you are in the Saudi Arabia of natural gas right now,” Wallace said. “You are standing here and you don't see the industry anywhere.”

Wallace helps lead a political action committee that runs billboard ads supporting Trump and said his support of the former president goes beyond his work.

Sponsor Message

He backs Trump because of what he believes are American values, which he explained as “The right of self-determination, the right to be a Christian nation, the right to determine your own outcome, the right to be free of government interference.”

A few miles west, Rose Faust, who spent 20 years in a ceramics factory and is now president of her local union chapter, believes Harris could “bring peace back to this country.”

Faust said she’s tired of seeing so much division in the country, and she feels that the country electing a woman of color is the kind of change the U.S. needs.

She began working in manufacturing to support her three daughters after a divorce. She worked the job until her body couldn’t handle it. She eventually needed surgery on both elbows. Though insurance has gotten more expensive, she still credits the union’s strong bargaining for previous health benefits. Her three daughters are all college graduates now.

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

Ahead of the election, Faust is knocking on doors of union members, both active and retired, to encourage them to vote. She said many of the older, retired members acknowledge that the union helped obtain many benefits they enjoyed during their working days.

Faust said she reminds them that President Biden signed into law the Butch Lewis Act, designed to protect their pensions, and that it only passed the U.S. Senate when Vice President Harris cast a tie-breaking vote.

“They take their union and their retirement seriously,” Faust said. ‘They’ll say ‘Hey, we’re Democrat no matter what. We know how we got our jobs. We know who took care of us all these years.’”

But others dismiss her sales pitch. Some members support Trump, voicing their concerns about immigrants and asylum seekers.

Faust is baffled by the lack of empathy for those fleeing violence and seeking better lives. Their struggles resonate deeply with her; she was born into a troubled family and grew up in foster care.

“I would open my home to anybody. Somebody opened their home to me years and years ago. Had that not happened, where would I have been? I could have been on the streets too, you know,” Faust said.



In Rankin, U.S. Steel worker William Timbers asked to meet at Styles Unlimited, a barber shop in this predominantly Black borough he described as “the country club in the hood.”

He has worked for U.S. Steel for nearly three decades and is active in the local union. For him, this work represents the American dream, which is why he supports the U.S. Steel’s sale to Nippon Steel of Japan. He, like others we spoke to in this economically depressed area, believes the sale could save jobs.

Sponsor Message

But neither candidate is winning him over on this issue that directly affects him because they both oppose the sale. He was truly an undecided voter, but that didn’t mean he was without his views on the election or planned to sit out like he did in 2020.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

“One candidate ain’t always going to line up with everything you believe in, so I got to go with the pros and cons,” Timbers said. “As of right now, I haven't made a choice. And everybody saying, ‘you haven't made a choice? You’re the last person in Pennsylvania’”

Timbers is concerned about Trump saying the country needs to have “one really violent day,” as a way to deter theft and property crime. “Violence begets violence,” Timbers said.

He added that, as a Christian man, what he loves about Trump is his pro-life stance — which was part of why he voted for him in 2016.

As for Harris, Timbers described her as “independent and strong on her views and her values and. I believe she may be a good candidate.”

Could he vote for a pro-choice candidate, we asked?

He stopped, smiled, chuckled and took a deep breath.

“That's a hard question,” Timbers said. “Yes, I could. If when you go through the checklist, if the checks is more pros than cons, I could.”



After a couple of days in the Pittsburgh area, we drove to Gettysburg, where just a few miles away from the historic battlefield, we met Korean War veteran Jack Powell.

Powell, who has lived here for 42 years, describes himself as a "firm believer in America" and is backing Trump.

“We’re going backwards. I mean, 15 million immigrants coming in here,” Powell said. “God knows where they're at. New York City's got one square block right now where you don't dare go because they're fighting each other.”

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

Estimates show that closer to 6 million migrants have entered the country under Biden without authorization or have been paroled into the U.S. under various programs.

Sponsor Message

Powell, who gets most of his news from the local Gettysburg Times — and YouTube — has just one big concern about his candidate:

“I wish he’d keep [his] mouth shut sometime, but then again, we all get our mouths in trouble.”



Next door, Matthew Nell shares a front lawn with Powell, where the Harris-Walz law sign he planted stands in contrast to his older neighbor’s Trump 2024 sign.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

Nell, a local college student who has done voter outreach for Harris and other Democrats, lives with his parents and grandparents. His minivan displays a bumper sticker in support of Pennsylvania U.S. Sen. John Fetterman.

The 22-year-old said he’s concerned about the effect of misinformation and disinformation on democracy. He worries about how false stories and conspiracy theories spread easily online and make their way around the country and the world.

“We are more connected than ever and it's leading us to more division than ever,” Nell said. “There has to be a way we can change education in a way that will allow for people to have more individuality within this sea of information [and] to have informed opinions that are closer to reality.”

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

On the eastern side of the state, NPR journalists met Norberto Dominguez. The son of two Dominican immigrants said he’s voting for Harris.

Born and raised in Brooklyn, New York, Dominguez moved to Pennsylvania in 1974, becoming a leader in Allentown’s emerging Latino community, which now makes up more than half the city’s population. He founded HALA, the Hispanic American League of Artists, to support Latino artists and preserve Latin culture.

“In speaking with folks, you see this wave of change within communities of color, and the conversations have been really fascinating at the barbershops in the different places that I visit and talk to people,” Dominguez said. We met Dominguez at a roundtable discussion NPR organized with local voters.

Sponsor Message

He’s fascinated by the way his community is engaging in politics at this moment.

“They are listening to everything, but they're also paying attention to what they're seeing from a body language perspective and then what they can repeat and translate from Spanish to English,” Dominguez said.

He said the language Trump uses is “embarrassing” and that he couldn’t repeat, or even translate, some words and ideas at the dinner table with his family.

“Some Latinos that were kind of leaning towards Trump, are kind of backing away because they can't say what he's saying at the kitchen table,” Dominguez shared. “There's this embarrassing factor that's affecting our community. And so it's hard to defend him when he's offending us at the same time.”

For this reason, Dominguez said Harris will win the election.



Jeffrey Opp, the only Republican who joined NPR’s Bethlehem roundtable, is voting for Trump.

After listening to others express support for Harris, Opp took a sip of water, sat up straight and said, “I'm a Republican. Yes, I'm voting for Trump.”

toggle caption Kriston Jae Bethel for NPR

A few ‘humphs’ and slight grunts were audible at the table, but Opp sat patiently as everyone spoke. He responded to any questions directed at him, including why he’s voting for Trump.

“Track record,” he said, “We had four years of Donald Trump, you look at the economics, we were stronger in the world. Then you look at four years of Biden-Harris — high inflation, no job creation, the economy isn't as good as it was. And we're weaker in the world.”

Some participants chimed in when Opp spoke, and there was a brief argument. But when the conversation ended, he shook everyone’s hands, hugged a few, and stood smiling for a picture with the whole group.



In nearby Allentown, we met José Rivera, who was tight-lipped about who he voted for in the last election – and who he’s backing this year.

We met Rivera at La Cocina Del Abuelo, a Latino-owned restaurant on a busy street where cars strolled by blasting bachata.

Sponsor Message

Rivera was born in New York City, where he was involved in gang activity at a young age. In an attempt to get him away from that lifestyle, his mother moved him to Allentown. But she couldn’t keep him from it, and he got involved in gang activity in the new city and was incarcerated several times. Years later, at age 52, he’s a leader in his community.

toggle caption Hannah Yoon for NPR

Slim, tall and with slick-back hair, he sat and ate among several vocal Harris supporters, but didn’t hesitate to criticize her campaign.

“I can say the messaging on both sides has been horrible,” Rivera said. “When someone [campaigning for Harris] calls the house and says — vote for us because you don’t want a convicted felon in the White House. [I say] hold up, I'm a convicted felon.”

He said he doesn’t feel completely welcomed by either campaign.

“I might not like him [Trump], but now you’re pushing me towards him,” Rivera said. “Because if he can win the White House, I can go for City Council, I can go for mayor, it opens up doors.”

Although he said he has something in common with Trump, he did not say who he would vote for come November.

Alfa Lopez sat at the same table with Rivera. She has complicated feelings about both candidates.

Lopez, a local Latino radio personality, sat at the table across from Rivera. Though she nodded when others’ spoke positively about Harris, she expressed the need to make an informed decision.

“I don’t want to make a mistake — or just be like, ‘Oh, she’s a female, she’s Black.’ You have to study her and you have to study every candidate.”

Like Rivera, Alfa didn’t say who she would vote for, or give any indication of which candidate she’s leaning toward. But she’s confident about one thing:

Sponsor Message

“My honest opinion, I don’t think the United States in general is ready to have a female. And that being said, I think Donald Trump is gonna win.”

Yasmine Hamou of Philadelphia has already cast her vote — and she’s cautiously hopeful of witnessing history again.

We met Hamou, 27, at Rittenhouse Square, where police sirens and car horns echoed. Streets were closed because Harris was in town.

“She’s right over there,” Hamou said, smiling and looking in the direction of where the sound was loudest.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

Hamou recalled knocking on doors with her mother for then-Sen. Barack Obama in 2008 around Gettysburg and nearby Hanover and staying up way past her bedtime to watch him declare victory.

“I just remember the excitement and the energy, even in such a conservative place, [about] this historic moment,” Hamou said. “It was one of the most powerful things I’ve ever done…I’ve been chasing that feeling ever since.”

Now working on voter outreach for Philadelphia’s Working Families Party. Hamou is focused on engaging with Democrats and independents.

As the daughter of a Black mother from the south and an Egyptian immigrant father, she’s inspired by Harris’ accomplishments as a woman of color.

“I know how difficult it is when you speak up in the workplace. You have to work 10 times as hard to get half the result as your white peers,” Hamou said. “When I was voting for her, I got a little emotional because I couldn’t believe I was seeing her name.”

But she’s not without reservations about the vice president. Hamou would’ve liked to hear Harris take a firmer stance against Israel’s actions in Gaza, including an arms embargo. She believes, however, that a vote for Harris is still progress and could yet lead to a more peaceful resolution than under Trump.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

“The number one thing we need to do is block white supremacy and the far right,” Hamou said. “Anchoring myself in that, and being grounded in knowing that, is how we get progressive wins and we can build a future that we want to see.”

Sponsor Message

Obed Manuel and Steve Inskeep reported from Pittsburgh, Gettysburg, and Philadelphia. Destinee Adams and Michel Martin reported from Allentown and Bethlehem.

Majd Al-Waheidi edited.
Off-color jokes, vitriol take over Trump Madison Square Garden rally

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

Donald Trump put on a rally in New York City’s Madison Square Garden on Sunday to kick off the final full week of campaigning for president, complete with celebrity guests and a new economic proposal. But repeated insults and at times racist and misogynistic remarks from guest speakers threatened to grab the most attention.

The final weeks of a campaign are often when candidates put forth a unifying message to gather as many voters as possible. Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally was instead marked by swear words, racist jokes about Latinos and misogynistic remarks.

The focus could help Trump grab headlines and mobilize some existing supporters, though it's unlikely to bring in new voters who are already turned off by some of the Republican presidential candidate’s rhetoric.

The first speaker at the former president’s Madison Square Garden rally, roast comedian and podcast host Tony Hinchcliffe, set the tone with a disparaging joke about welcoming Latinos into the U.S. “with open arms” while making a shooing motion.

Sponsor Message

He also disparaged Latinos with a crass joke about making babies and illegal immigration, quipped that Puerto Rico is “a floating island of garbage,” and joked that Kansas City Chiefs tight end Travis Kelce “might be the next O.J. Simpson,” referring to the football star who was accused and later acquitted of murdering his ex-wife.

Kelce is in a relationship with pop singer Taylor Swift, who earlier this year said she would vote for Vice President Harris.

Trump has made anti-immigrant rhetoric a centerpiece of his campaign. As president, he also talked about ending the automatic right to citizenship for babies born in the U.S. to noncitizens — though many scholars agree changing the law could require a constitutional amendment.

The Trump campaign is currently fighting to get votes from women and Latinos. Polls suggest the gender gap in this year’s election could be the largest on record. The Harris campaign, in contrast, has been highlighting stories of women whose lives have been threatened by strict abortion bans.

The Harris campaign immediately seized on Hinchcliffe’s remarks about Puerto Rico. In a tweet posted after his introduction, Hinchcliffe wrote in response, “These people have no sense of humor.” He also added, “I love Puerto Rico and vacation there. I made fun of everyone… watch the whole set.”

The Trump campaign also distanced itself from Hinchliffe's remarks.

"This joke does not reflect the views of President Trump or the campaign," Danielle Alvarez, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, said in a statement.



Defining who is an American

The rally marshaled high-profile Trump supporters including Terry Bollea — better known as the professional wrestler Hulk Hogan — television personality Dr. Phil McGraw and singer-songwriter Lee Greenwood.

But other Trump allies appealed to an “us versus them” mentality. Radio host Sid Rosenberg insulted former Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, as well as the Democratic Party as a whole.

“The whole party — a bunch of degenerates,” he added. “Jew-haters and lowlifes, every one of them.”

Sponsor Message

Multiple speakers also insulted Harris, with private equity fund manager Grant Cardone calling her a "fake." "Her and her pimp handlers will destroy our country," he said.

Conservative commentator Tucker Carlson later made fun of Harris’ mixed-race heritage.

“It’s gonna be pretty hard [for Democrats] to look at us and say, ‘You know what? Kamala Harris, she got 85 million votes because she’s just so impressive. As the first Samoan-Malaysian low-IQ former California prosecutor ever to be elected president. It was just a groundswell of popular support.’”

Carlson went beyond insults, nodding to the racist “great replacement theory” he has espoused in the past.

“People know in a country that has been taken over by a leadership class that actually despises them and their values and their history and their culture and their customs, really hates them to the point that it's trying to replace them,” he said. “They know someone who actually has affection for them and that's Donald Trump. And it’s requited.”

That sentiment was echoed later, when former Trump White House aide Stephen Miller told the crowd: “America is for Americans and Americans only.”



Tax credits and ‘enemy from within’

After a more than four-hour pre-program of speakers, Melania Trump made a rare campaign trail appearance, introducing her husband.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

In his speech, Trump started by laying out his economic message, emphasizing the inflation that hit the country under the Biden administration, and saying he would fix it.

He also announced a new policy, saying he would implement a tax credit for people caring for family members at home.

Harris earlier this month announced her own plan to expand Medicare to cover that kind of caregiving.

Trump also devoted a large section of his speech, as he often does, to the topic of undocumented immigrants.

“Once I take office, the migrant invasion of our country ends and the restoration of our country begins,” he told the crowd.

Trump also took the time to address a recent interview with Fox News, in which he had characterized “radical left lunatics” as “the enemy from within” and proposed using the military against them.

He stood behind those comments at Sunday night’s rally.

“They’re smart and they’re vicious, and we have to defeat them,” he said. “And when I say, ‘the enemy from within,’ the other side goes crazy. Becomes a sound — ‘oh, how can he say’ — no, they’ve done very bad things to this country. They are indeed the enemy from within.”

However, Trump still attempted to make his speech into a message of unity.

“The Republican Party has really become the party of inclusion, and there’s something nice about that,” he said near the end of his remarks.

Sponsor Message

NPR's Stephen Fowler contributed to this report.
Fewer Black men are enrolling in HBCUs. Here's why and what's being done

toggle caption Alex Wong/Getty Images

The absolute number of Black men enrolled at Historically Black Colleges and Universities is the lowest it's been since 1976.

That's according to recent analysis from the American Institute for Boys and Men, which crunched data from the Department of Education.

In fact, Black men now currently account for only 26% of the students at HBCUs — back in 1976, that figure was 38%.

All Things Considered host Juana Summers spoke to Calvin Hadley — assistant provost for academic partnerships and student engagement at Howard University — about what's happening, what's lost when Black men don't attend HBCUs, and how he is trying to close this gap.

This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

Sponsor Message

Interview highlights

Juana Summers: I want to start by talking about Howard, which, of course, is one of the foremost HBCUs in this country — a long, long list that I cannot recite of incredible alumni, including Vice President Kamala Harris. Let's start there. Are you seeing this decline among Black male students where you are?

Calvin Hadley: I am. I'm a Howard alum, and so I remember as a student, the numbers were also pretty stark at that time. I think we were around 33-34% when I was a student, between 2004 and 2008. Now, as you announced in your introduction, Howard University is around 25% male total. And I think a recent statistics said around 19% Black male. And so that is felt on campus, that is felt, I think, in our social clubs, it's felt on the yard. And I think many of our male students have commented that in some of their classes, they're the only male in their class.

toggle caption Brandon Bell/Getty Images

Summers: So I will just say, I did not attend an HBCU. I attended a PWI — a predominantly white institution — but I have so many friends and family members who attended HBCUs. They talk to me about what that experience has meant to them, not just while they're on campus, but when they go out into their professional lives. They stay connected to the HBCU experience. They stay connected to communities like the Howard community that you represent. So I just want to ask you, when there are fewer Black men on campus, walk us through: what does that mean? What do we lose when those Black men are not as robust a presence on campuses like yours?

Sponsor Message

Hadley: By the time students actually come to college, we're dealing with the males that have actually transcended what we call the “belief gap” — this gap in between what students can actually achieve and what their professors, teachers, counselors believe they can achieve. For Black males, that gap is the largest. When they get into the campus, the campus experiences are significantly impacted by the imbalance, right?

At every educational institution, we want a diversity of experience. And so when you don't have as many males in the classroom, that diversity of experience is significantly impacted. It gets even more scary when we trace it forward, right? I think we're dealing with some really unique statistics right now. Black males are graduating at a much lower rate than Black females.

Summers: And that's across all colleges.

Hadley: Across all colleges, not just HBCUs. And so this drop in the past decade has been seen more drastically. But the reality is, this is not a Howard problem. This is not an HBCU problem. This is not a PWI problem. This is an American education problem.

Summers: I want to shift gears a bit and talk about what happens when these Black men are graduating from high school and they're deciding what comes next, what that next step is. The study that we've been talking about, it notes that since 2010, as you point out, Black male enrollment has gone down across all colleges. And it also points out that HBCU enrollment has also decreased on the whole, but the decline of Black male enrollment at HBCUs outpaces those trends, if only slightly. Can you just explain to me how you understand that gap?

Hadley: So I want to take a small step back. In 2013-14 we had 2990 male applicants for Howard University specifically. In 2022-23 we had 9705. A significant, significant increase.

toggle caption Anna Rose Layden/Getty Images/Getty Images North America

Summers: And what does that say to you?

Sponsor Message

Hadley: That the Howard University education, and the HBCU education, is highly sought after, right? And there are a number of really important things that happened between 2012 and 2022 — one of those was the election of President Donald Trump, another was the murder of George Floyd. I think when those things happen in the United States of America, the HBCU experience, which had already been known to many of us, had now become a much more attractive proposition. You notice a significant increase in those male applications.

What I didn't provide you was the number of female applications that accompany that. While we received 9700 male applications in 2022-23, we received upwards of 30,000 female applications. And I want to take a step aside and say Black women are ripping it up. All the statistics show, from high school to college to college graduation, that the Black women is successful today, and the trajectory is going straight up. Unfortunately, when you look at the Black male, the exact opposite is the case. And so for those Black males that are now being left out of the college equation, that also means they're being left out and stratified out of a certain portion of our society.

What we now will have is an imbalance in the community that has a significant impact on our ability to create whole families, I think. On the ability for us to ensure that our generations after us have additional success, and really to have additional mobility.

Summers: I want to end on this: You are a product of Howard University, as you point out. You now work for the university. And you're raising two young Black boys. What's your pitch for why a young Black man who might be hearing our conversation in 2024 should choose to attend an HBCU?

Hadley: Wow. Thank you for that. You attend an HBCU for an education and not a degree, and as an assistant provost, that's not a popular thing to say. The education that you receive in an HBCU transcends the classroom experience. It transcends the relationship that you have with your professor. The education exists in between the lines of the pages. HBCUs inundate you with the sense of belief. We talked about the importance of that belief on the front end, the belief gap that exists in K through 12.

Sponsor Message

HBCUs are created to instill you with the belief that you can be even larger than you can dream. Howard University and the HBCU community has provided me — and many other people, like our vice president — with the sense that I am enough. I can be successful academically. But my world is not simply academics. I can be enough and I can contribute to this society, in this space, in a way that allows me to feel whole and allows me to contribute to something much larger than myself. The HBCU community needs you. And so when I'm talking to that young man in 2024: Come because we need you. Come because you're important. Come because without you, our community is hurt.
Donald Trump's closing argument: leaning into the extreme rhetoric

Enlarge this image toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

On Sunday afternoon, to kick off the last full week of the 2024 presidential campaign, thousands of people lined up under a screen several stories high with the image of former President Donald Trump.



They were waiting outside New York's Madison Square Garden where Trump was holding a campaign rally.



It was a homecoming of sorts for the man who has portrayed himself as the quintessential New Yorker.



The headliner took the stage two hours after he was scheduled to, and before that...more than two dozen others spoke.



Many leaned into racist, misogynistic and vulgar rhetoric, like comedian Tony Hinchcliffe, who now famously referred to Puerto Rico as a "floating pile of garbage"



There was intense backlash, and a Trump campaign advisor later put out a statement distancing the former President from Hinchcliff's remarks.



But Hinchcliffe wasn't the only speaker who used incendiary language during the rally Sunday night.

Sponsor Message

You're reading the Consider This newsletter, which unpacks one major news story each day. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to more from the Consider This podcast.

More key voices at the event

Trump's childhood friend David Rem referred to Vice President Kamala Harris as the devil, calling her the "antichrist."



And Stephen Miller, a policy advisor in the Trump White House and current senior campaign advisor underscored the former President's anti-immigrant message, saying "America is for Americans and Americans only."



Other speakers included Elon Musk, Hulk Hogan, New York Congresswoman Elise Stefanik and Phil McGraw – better known as Dr. Phil.



Finally, more than four hours into the program, Trump took the stage and spoke for another 78 minutes – repeating many of the themes his warm up acts had touched on, promising some of the following:

Launching the "largest deportation program in American history to get these criminals

out"

out" Getting critical race theory and "transgender insanity the hell out of our schools"



Trump referred to his opponent as a "train wreck," and promised the following: "This election is a choice between whether we will have four more years of gross incompetence and failure or whether we will begin the four greatest years in the history of our country."

Sponsor Message

Closing up his campaign.

The rhetoric from this rally has generated plenty of conversation online for the fate of Trump's campaign. How was it received?



NPR political correspondent Danielle Kurtzleben says the fallout following the Puerto Rico comment was immediate, starting before the rally was even over.



"You had New York Democratic Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and vice presidential nominee Tim Walz, who were doing an online event for the Harris campaign already. They played that clip and reacted with disgust as they heard it. Not only that, but pretty immediately, the Harris campaign itself quickly retweeted a clip"



Republican politicians, including Florida Sen. Rick Scott and Congressman Carlos Gimenez, also criticized that joke.



"And the Trump campaign got the message in a statement late last night. The campaign's senior adviser, Danielle Alvarez, said, 'This joke does not reflect the views of President Trump or the campaign,'" added Kurtlzeben.



So, does she expect the campaign to be affected by this?



"What's been remarkable in this absolutely wild election year is that almost nothing has shifted the polls, aside from the Democrats swapping candidates. Besides that, it's been remarkably stable: assassination attempts, Trump saying immigrants are vermin poisoning the blood of the nation...Nothing seems to budge."



And while it is unusual for the Trump campaign to backtrack on just about anything, it might be too close to say if it could impact the final result of the election.

This episode was produced by Brianna Scott. It was edited by Courtney Dorning and Megan Pratz. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
Two headline-grabbing events took place Friday in the race for president. Republican Donald Trump sat down for a three-hour interview with popular podcast host Joe Rogan. And Vice President Kamala Harris held the largest event of her campaign, a massive rally in Houston featuring hometown hero Beyoncé and attended by an estimated 30,000 people.

The Harris-Beyoncé rally will likely go down as a bigger winner than the Trump-Rogan interview.

If the goals of these two events were simply to generate media coverage, then it was just about a tie. But each campaign was seeking to increase vote turnout in this close election. Given those goals, the Harris-Beyoncé rally will likely go down as a bigger winner than the Trump-Rogan interview.

We can’t know until all the votes are counted which event, if either, helped increase turnout — if we even know then. But look at the focus of these two events and ask yourself which one offered a message that would animate more people to get off the couch, head to the polls and wait on long lines to vote. The answer should be obvious. It wasn’t Trump’s interview. (Nor was the rally he held at Madison Square Garden Sunday likely inspire people on the fence to commit to voting for him.)

Trump’s appearance on the top-rated podcast is consistent with his strategy to court young male voters, that is, the “bro vote.” Rogan’s podcast audience of 14 million people is estimated to be 81% male — of which 56% are under 35. According to a recent NBC News poll, Trump leads among male voters in general by 16 points while Harris holds a 14-point lead among female voters. Before you dismiss those gender gaps as a wash, keep in mind that since 1980, women have the bigger percentage of the electorate in presidential elections. In 2020’s presidential election, 54.7% of voters were women.

In the meandering conversation with Rogan, Trump, as he’s done throughout the campaign, peddled the same old lies that the 2020 race was stolen from him and essentially argued that nothing bad would be happening in the entire world if he were president. Serving up his trademark misogyny, Trump called Harris “not smart” and slammed the hosts of ABC’s “The View” who criticized him as “stupid women.”

Mostly low energy throughout, Trump served up nothing new or compelling.

On every level, from energy to policy to message discipline, the contrast with the Harris rally was stark. Unlike Trump’s Rogan interview, where he mentioned a whole laundry list of grievances, Harris’ rally, which drew an estimated 30,000 people to Houston’s Shell Energy Stadium, was laser-focused on one issue: reproductive freedom. (The NBC News poll mentioned above asked respondents, “Is there one issue you feel so strongly about that you will vote for or against a candidate solely on that issue?” At 22%, the top response was “abortion.”)

Texas hasn’t voted for a Democratic presidential candidate since 1976, but Harris held her rally there because, her campaign said, Texas has become “ground zero” for the oppressive and dangerous abortion bans Republican-controlled states ushered in after Roe v. Wade was overturned.

This massive rally, which a DJ at times helped turn into a dance party, became powerfully somber when the real-world impact of the abortion bans was discussed. Doctors shared first-person accounts of how Republicans’ abortion bans had caused women to physically suffer, and even die, and how many physicians fear going to jail if they perform abortions.

Then entered Beyoncé, one of the most famous people on the planet. She didn’t sing, but she did perform. That performance was a moving speech where the mother of three said, “I’m not here as a celebrity, I’m not here as a politician. I’m here as a mother.” She further described herself as “a mother who cares deeply about the world my children and all of our children live in, a world where we have the freedom to control our bodies.”

I’m not here as a celebrity, I’m not here as a politician. I’m here as a mother. Beyoncé at a kamala harris rally in houston

When Harris later took the stage, her message was simple: If Trump wins, what’s happening to women in Texas could happen to women nationwide. “If you think you are protected from Trump abortion bans because you live in Michigan, Pennsylvania, Nevada, New York, California or any state where voters or legislators have protected reproductive freedom, please know: No one is protected,” the vice president declared. She added, “Because a Donald Trump national ban will outlaw abortion in every single state.”

Politico recently reported that Trump has all but given up on expanding his support among women. But in Houston, Harris made a direct plea to men. She spoke to and for men who don’t want to see their wives’ lives or their daughters’ lives put at risk because of these abortion bans. “I see the men here and I thank you!” she said. “The men of America don’t want this.”

Kamala Harris with Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland during a campaign rally in Houston, on Friday. Justin Sullivan / Getty Images

Trump, on the Rogan podcast, with his them-versus-us mentality, offered young men something akin to the thrill of their favorite team winning a big game. And nothing more. Trump was not promising to address something for these men that will personally change their lives. The same is true for Trump’s rally Sunday at Madison Square Garden, which was notable for the racism, bigotry and sexism spewed by speakers and Trump’s focus (again) on his personal grievances. As Harris said Monday about Trump’s MSG rally, nothing he says “is actually going to support the aspirations, the dreams and the ambitions of the American people.”

Harris’ message in Houston could not have been more personal for women and everybody who cares about them. These abortion bans are barbaric. States with them are seeing a higher rate of women dying because they can’t access the health care they need.

Trump may be pleased with the media coverage his interview with Rogan attracted — and even Sunday’s rally, since he loves when people are talking about him. But votes win elections. And I think Harris’ focus on reproductive freedom, with a megastar by her side, is the more likely way to turn out, and not turn off, voters.
Fewer Black men are enrolling in HBCUs. Here's why and what's being done

toggle caption Alex Wong/Getty Images

The absolute number of Black men enrolled at Historically Black Colleges and Universities is the lowest it's been since 1976.

That's according to recent analysis from the American Institute for Boys and Men, which crunched data from the Department of Education.

In fact, Black men now currently account for only 26% of the students at HBCUs — back in 1976, that figure was 38%.

All Things Considered host Juana Summers spoke to Calvin Hadley — assistant provost for academic partnerships and student engagement at Howard University — about what's happening, what's lost when Black men don't attend HBCUs, and how he is trying to close this gap.

This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

Sponsor Message

Interview highlights

Juana Summers: I want to start by talking about Howard, which, of course, is one of the foremost HBCUs in this country — a long, long list that I cannot recite of incredible alumni, including Vice President Kamala Harris. Let's start there. Are you seeing this decline among Black male students where you are?

Calvin Hadley: I am. I'm a Howard alum, and so I remember as a student, the numbers were also pretty stark at that time. I think we were around 33-34% when I was a student, between 2004 and 2008. Now, as you announced in your introduction, Howard University is around 25% male total. And I think a recent statistics said around 19% Black male. And so that is felt on campus, that is felt, I think, in our social clubs, it's felt on the yard. And I think many of our male students have commented that in some of their classes, they're the only male in their class.

toggle caption Brandon Bell/Getty Images

Summers: So I will just say, I did not attend an HBCU. I attended a PWI — a predominantly white institution — but I have so many friends and family members who attended HBCUs. They talk to me about what that experience has meant to them, not just while they're on campus, but when they go out into their professional lives. They stay connected to the HBCU experience. They stay connected to communities like the Howard community that you represent. So I just want to ask you, when there are fewer Black men on campus, walk us through: what does that mean? What do we lose when those Black men are not as robust a presence on campuses like yours?

Sponsor Message

Hadley: By the time students actually come to college, we're dealing with the males that have actually transcended what we call the “belief gap” — this gap in between what students can actually achieve and what their professors, teachers, counselors believe they can achieve. For Black males, that gap is the largest. When they get into the campus, the campus experiences are significantly impacted by the imbalance, right?

At every educational institution, we want a diversity of experience. And so when you don't have as many males in the classroom, that diversity of experience is significantly impacted. It gets even more scary when we trace it forward, right? I think we're dealing with some really unique statistics right now. Black males are graduating at a much lower rate than Black females.

Summers: And that's across all colleges.

Hadley: Across all colleges, not just HBCUs. And so this drop in the past decade has been seen more drastically. But the reality is, this is not a Howard problem. This is not an HBCU problem. This is not a PWI problem. This is an American education problem.

Summers: I want to shift gears a bit and talk about what happens when these Black men are graduating from high school and they're deciding what comes next, what that next step is. The study that we've been talking about, it notes that since 2010, as you point out, Black male enrollment has gone down across all colleges. And it also points out that HBCU enrollment has also decreased on the whole, but the decline of Black male enrollment at HBCUs outpaces those trends, if only slightly. Can you just explain to me how you understand that gap?

Hadley: So I want to take a small step back. In 2013-14 we had 2990 male applicants for Howard University specifically. In 2022-23 we had 9705. A significant, significant increase.

toggle caption Anna Rose Layden/Getty Images/Getty Images North America

Summers: And what does that say to you?

Sponsor Message

Hadley: That the Howard University education, and the HBCU education, is highly sought after, right? And there are a number of really important things that happened between 2012 and 2022 — one of those was the election of President Donald Trump, another was the murder of George Floyd. I think when those things happen in the United States of America, the HBCU experience, which had already been known to many of us, had now become a much more attractive proposition. You notice a significant increase in those male applications.

What I didn't provide you was the number of female applications that accompany that. While we received 9700 male applications in 2022-23, we received upwards of 30,000 female applications. And I want to take a step aside and say Black women are ripping it up. All the statistics show, from high school to college to college graduation, that the Black women is successful today, and the trajectory is going straight up. Unfortunately, when you look at the Black male, the exact opposite is the case. And so for those Black males that are now being left out of the college equation, that also means they're being left out and stratified out of a certain portion of our society.

What we now will have is an imbalance in the community that has a significant impact on our ability to create whole families, I think. On the ability for us to ensure that our generations after us have additional success, and really to have additional mobility.

Summers: I want to end on this: You are a product of Howard University, as you point out. You now work for the university. And you're raising two young Black boys. What's your pitch for why a young Black man who might be hearing our conversation in 2024 should choose to attend an HBCU?

Hadley: Wow. Thank you for that. You attend an HBCU for an education and not a degree, and as an assistant provost, that's not a popular thing to say. The education that you receive in an HBCU transcends the classroom experience. It transcends the relationship that you have with your professor. The education exists in between the lines of the pages. HBCUs inundate you with the sense of belief. We talked about the importance of that belief on the front end, the belief gap that exists in K through 12.

Sponsor Message

HBCUs are created to instill you with the belief that you can be even larger than you can dream. Howard University and the HBCU community has provided me — and many other people, like our vice president — with the sense that I am enough. I can be successful academically. But my world is not simply academics. I can be enough and I can contribute to this society, in this space, in a way that allows me to feel whole and allows me to contribute to something much larger than myself. The HBCU community needs you. And so when I'm talking to that young man in 2024: Come because we need you. Come because you're important. Come because without you, our community is hurt.
At a campaign rally in Michigan on Friday night, Donald Trump returned to one of the few messages he emphasizes just about every day as Election Day draws closer. “60 Minutes should be taken off the air, and CBS should lose its license,” the former president said.

A day later, the GOP candidate pointed to journalists covering one of his rallies and said news organizations are “evil” and that media professionals are “actually the enemy of the people.”

When Trump first started echoing Joseph Stalin in 2018, the result was a meaningful national controversy. Six years later, the Republican uses the language so regularly, it has become the background noise of our civil lives, and few bother to take note.

But whether people care or not, the Republican nominee for the nation’s highest office is eyeing the kind of crackdown on the free press that one might ordinarily expect to see in countries indifferent to the rule of law. Just recently, he has not only launched a bizarre and baseless crusade against CBS and its flagship news magazine, he also has threatened The New York Times.

A week earlier, after condemning American news organizations as “corrupt,” Trump added that he wants to “straighten out” the nation’s press.

Part of the problem, of course, is that the United States has a First Amendment that prohibits politicians from trying to “straighten out” news organizations that publish reports they don’t like. Another part of the problem, as New York magazine’s Jon Chait noted, is that we’ve already seen the Republican take some steps down this path: “Trump did attempt to ‘straighten out the press’ during his first term by putting selective regulatory pressure on its owners. He blocked a merger benefitting CNN and denied a lucrative Pentagon contract to Amazon to punish the owners of independent media. Trump says the press is ‘corrupt,’ but corruption is the very method he is employing publicly to bring the major news organs into line.”

But just as notable is how some major news organizations are responding to these threats by pre-emptively surrendering to the candidate running on an authoritarian platform. NBC News reported on The Washington Post’s sudden and unexpected decision to stop making endorsements in presidential elections.

Post editorial page staff members had drafted an endorsement of Vice President Kamala Harris that had yet to be published, two sources briefed on the sequence of events told The Post. The decision not to publish the Harris endorsement was made by The Post’s owner, billionaire Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, according to the sources. NBC News has not independently verified that account.

Days earlier, the Los Angeles Times made a similar announcement. Semafor reported that the newspaper also intended to endorse Harris, but its owner, Patrick Soon-Shiong, intervened and prevented the newspaper’s editorial page from publishing a piece supporting the Democratic nominee.

As you’ve probably heard, the developments have led to resignations and reader cancellations, and these ongoing developments are clearly important. But I’m also struck by the broader circumstances: As the Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office — a man who might very well be sworn into office in 84 days — eyes an unprecedented crackdown on the free press, news organizations face a unique set of threats.

I don’t have any special insights into why the wealthy owners of two of the nation’s largest daily newspapers chose cowardice over journalistic standards, but if Bezos and Soon-Shiong intervened because they were afraid of post-election retribution from Trump, then the United States has already reached a point that should scare us all.

This is, after all, no time for cowardice in the home of the brave.

In Timothy Snyder’s book “On Tyranny,” the Yale historian offers readers lessons on how to respond to authoritarianism. The first lesson: “Do not obey in advance.”

“Most of the power of authoritarianism is freely given,” the book reads. “In times like these, individuals think ahead about what a more repressive government will want, and then they offer themselves without being asked. A citizen who adapts in this way is teaching power what it can do.”

Perhaps someone can send a copy of the book to Bezos and Soon-Shiong?
When Donald Trump, seven months into his presidency, pardoned the corrupt Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio before he could even be sentenced—calling the 85-year-old a “great American patriot”—it caused a gigantic scandal.

Arpaio, who had been convicted of criminal contempt of court for refusing to stop the discriminatory detention of Latino people in Maricopa County, already had a decadeslong reputation for inhumane treatment of inmates in the county’s jails, as well as other forms of cruelty and bigotry. But he was also a staunch Trump ally, an original proponent of the birther movement against Barack Obama, and a partner in Trump’s nativist crusade against immigrants.

So Trump stood by his pardon of “Sheriff Joe” and said: “I think the people of Arizona who really know him best would agree with me.”

That first pardon broke with accepted norms, but by the end of his term, when Trump had granted pardons or commutations to 237 people, few were surprised by the kinds of recipients on the list. There were war criminals and police officers accused of brutality. There were scores of people who had been convicted of political corruption or fraud. The then president wasn’t exceptional in pardoning large numbers of people—Obama, for example, granted executive clemency to 1,927, many as part of mass commutations for nonviolent drug offenses—but Trump’s pardons were remarkably self-serving.

Advertisement

The full list includes an eclectic mix of criminals: drug dealers, wildlife smugglers, rappers who illegally possessed firearms, even sellers of bad beef. But there’s a category of recipient that stands out: his own people. Donald Trump had a remarkable number of people in his orbit who were convicted of crimes, including Steve Bannon, Michael Flynn, Roger Stone, and Paul Manafort.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Some of these figures have now been hired by the Trump campaign. Others have carved out careers as voices of the MAGA movement in exile, pushing the former president’s lies about the 2020 election and grievances about the Biden administration.

“Loyalty is paramount for Donald Trump and his network,” said Jennifer Mercieca, a professor at Texas A&M University who studies political rhetoric. “The ones who stayed loyal have been rewarded with pardons that have enabled them to continue to be loyal to him, to go out and create an alternate media universe—one that’s largely unseen to the mainstream media consumer.”

Advertisement

If Trump wins in November, this is a cohort that stands ready to return to power, and once again fall in line with Trump’s orders.

Since the Trump years, some of those who were pardoned or had their sentences commuted thanks to Trump connections have gotten in trouble with the law again. Jamie Davidson, who had been convicted of murder in 1993 and saw his sentence commuted during Trump’s final days in office, was in 2023 convicted of assaulting his wife. Jonathan Braun, a drug dealer who had secured his commutation after working connections with Ivanka Trump’s father-in-law, Charles Kushner, and Trumpworld lawyer Alan Dershowitz, was this year also arrested for assaulting his wife and his 75-year-old father-in-law. And Ponzi schemer Eliyahu Weinstein, who had been serving a 24-year sentence for fraud when he received his commutation in January 2021, was charged in 2023 in a separate $35 million fraud scheme.

Advertisement

Advertisement

But a step-back look at the list of connected individuals who benefited from Trump’s pardons shows that the most significant outcome is not recidivism. It’s a blind embrace of conspiracy theories. The phalanx of loyal messengers who were pardoned have, since Trump was voted out of office, continued to amplify the election-conspiracy claims that flatter Trump’s ego and strengthen the idea that he was robbed of power. They were shown by Trump that extreme and total loyalty would be rewarded and have pushed his vision—betting on cashing in on that loyalty again.

Advertisement

Trump pardoned members of Congress who were loyal to him. He pardoned several members of his campaign and staff who were prosecuted in the Russia investigation. On the campaign trail this time around, he has floated the idea of pardoning the Jan. 6 insurrectionists, should he retake office. Many of these pardon recipients were either energized by Trump’s favor to step up their activism or freed, literally, to reengage with his politics.

Advertisement

Bernard Kerik, a former commissioner of the New York Police Department and a former senior staffer in the George W. Bush administration, served three years in prison for tax-fraud charges and was released just before Trump won the 2016 election. Four years and a pardon later, he would become one of the biggest drivers of the Trump’s effort to overturn the previous election, pushing false evidence of election fraud within Republican circles along with Rudy Giuliani, his personal friend. Biden’s inauguration didn’t end Kerik’s work in the election-denial movement: In July of this year, he flew to Nashville to support an event held by Kash Patel, a former Trump government official who has formed an entire postgovernment career around election denialism and fighting the deep state.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Phil Lyman, a member of the Utah House of Representatives, was convicted of charges relating to public land management after leading an illegal ATV protest on federal lands in 2014. He had long since served his 10-day jail sentence by the time he was pardoned by Trump. Lyman was energized by Trump’s fraud claims after the 2020 election, attending a 2021 “cybersymposium” event in South Dakota in which My Pillow founder Mike Lindell promised to reveal proof of Chinese hackers stealing the election from Trump. He would go on to be a speaker at another Lindell election-conspiracy event, in Colorado. Afterward, Lyman publicly claimed to have heard reports of rigged voting machines and urged Utahans to send evidence of election malfeasance to two conspiracy-theory promoters from the state who are popular on social media.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Lyman internalized these tactics, eventually deploying them to cause chaos in his own election campaigns. This year, running in the Republican primary for Utah governor, Lyman claimed that his opponent (another Republican and the sitting governor) was actively trying to “steal” the election. (Lyman lost.)

While some pardoned loyalists, such as Kerik, schemed with the Trump campaign directly, others developed more publicity-forward (and profit-focused) election-interference ambitions. Michael Flynn, who was briefly Trump’s national security adviser, is the poster child for this. For some years now, he has held a touring conspiracy-theory spectacle called “ReAwaken America,” in which he pushes QAnon-friendly ideas—often about “globalists” scheming to stop Trump’s work against the deep state—alongside other far-right celebrities and influencers. Flynn was pardoned for lying to the FBI about conversations he had had with the Russian ambassador while he was part of the Trump transition team in 2016; Trump’s prepardon pressure campaign to protect Flynn was at the center of FBI Director James Comey’s firing and Trump’s obstruction-of-justice efforts detailed in the Mueller investigation.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Flynn’s attempts to turn himself into a right-wing hero have paid off: According to the New York Times, Flynn and his family members have made at least $2.2 million off his various self-promotion ventures, including payments from a crowdsourced legal fund. He sells branded merchandise, including a series of “FlynnLock” rifles. He has also recently released a film about his own battle against the deep state.

Dinesh D’Souza is the intellectual persona to Flynn’s military man. A former college president who was pardoned in 2018 for an illegal-campaign-contribution felony, D’Souza made the 2022 film 2000 Mules, a deeply influential source of misinformation about the 2020 election. He hosts a right-wing podcast with his wife; joined Tucker Carlson on a lecture series in Australia; and in 2023 released another film, this time accusing federal law-enforcement agencies of persecuting Christians and Jan. 6 defendants. On Sept. 27, D’Souza released his latest documentary, Vindicating Trump, which presents fabricated scenes of journalists, Democratic strategists, and federal agents scheming to prevent Trump from winning the upcoming 2024 election through trumped-up criminal charges and other legal attacks, as well as an assassination attempt. And it once again presents false evidence of election interference.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The corrupt former Democratic governor of Illinois and now committed “Trumpocrat” Rod Blagojevich is another Trump pardon recipient pushing wildly dangerous misinformation. (He has said he’s currently writing a memoir with a chapter dedicated to “weaponized prosecutors and rigged politicized trials,” as he put it on X.) But although D’Souza, Blagojevich, and Lyman had reason to be grateful for Trump, they didn’t have the particular honor of going to jail for things they did while working for him. The true prestige among the pardons—at least in the eyes of supporters inclined to believe in a conspiracy of politically motivated judicial persecution—is carried by those who were caught up in the Russia investigation and refused to publicly turn on Trump. Along with Flynn, the most triumphant figure in this category is perhaps George Papadopoulos.

Advertisement

Papadopoulos was convicted of lying to the FBI about his interactions with a European professor and potential Russian agent who offered, during the 2016 campaign, to connect him with top Kremlin officials who had “dirt” on Hillary Clinton. Papadopoulos had worked his way onto the Trump campaign’s foreign policy team via Ben Carson’s campaign, though after he was ensnared in special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation, Trump publicly called Papadopoulos a virtually unknown, “young, low-level volunteer” and “proven liar.” Still, the incident helped Papadopoulos rise from obscurity: He served just 12 days in prison in 2018 but was happy to publish a book with the grandiose title Deep State Target: How I Got Caught in the Crosshairs of the Plot to Bring Down President Trump.

Advertisement

Advertisement

In recent years, he and his wife, Simona Mangiante Papadopoulos, have spread election distrust abroad, doing conservative European media hits, often to discuss Trump’s 2024 campaign. (Mangiante Papadopoulos was also involved in the creation of a documentary called Hunter’s Laptop: Requiem for Ukraine, which premiered on Sept. 5 and featured Bannon as a talking head.) The couple are on the editorial board of and sometimes write for the far-right, pro-Russia website Intelligencer, which produces pro-Russian views about the war in Ukraine, alongside far-right disinformation about the U.S. election and vaccines.

Advertisement

The effect of all of these Trump loyalists effectively preaching propaganda on Trump’s behalf has been to strengthen the idea of a grand conspiracy against Trump that reaches untold numbers of vulnerable people through the internet, TV, and podcasts. The convoluted arguments they make to push the idea that Trump is a victim of the system—perhaps much like themselves—are no less dangerous for being comically absurd. As D’Souza tells Trump in the movie trailer to 2000 Mules: “You didn’t do an insurrection. Had you called for one, there would have been one. And there would be one if you called for it now.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

There is one name that stands out among the list of Trump’s pardon recipients for his long-term planning: Steve Bannon. Trump’s 2016 campaign chair and a senior strategist during his presidency, Bannon is perhaps singular among MAGA world pardon recipients in that he doesn’t cling to the former president for political relevance. Rather, Bannon, through his own media empire, pulls different strains of the far right together, teasing out and connecting their similar passions and paranoias. The War Room, Bannon’s TV and audio show, remains incredibly popular, even as its creator sits in prison for contempt-of-Congress charges related to his refusal to cooperate with the House Jan. 6 committee. (Trump’s pardon of Bannon was unrelated to Jan. 6; it concerned mail fraud and money laundering in connection with a fundraising campaign to pay for Trump’s border wall—he still faces state charges in New York for that crime.)

Advertisement

On the show, which airs every day, a collection of guest hosts regale listeners with shadowy tales of the evils of the left, of the global power structures plotting against American patriots, and of the immigrants who threaten the very stability of the country. When he returns from prison, at the end of this month, Bannon will continue his work of ceaselessly generating talking points for conservative pundits and politicians, including Trump, and pushing the MAGA movement toward a cohesive vision of right-wing nationalist populism.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“He’s figured out a way to try to assemble a MAGA movement that is Trump-supportive but not necessarily Trump-centered—something that can sustain itself into the future,” said Matt Gertz, a senior fellow at the left-leaning organization Media Matters for America. But although Bannon has a less desperate relationship with Trump—he has called Trump a “moderate” and can fill airtime with rants fully unconnected to whatever is happening in Trump’s world—he still seems to need the former president for his ambitions. This is something Bannon shares with other media-adroit pardon recipients, including Flynn and Roger Stone.

Advertisement

“Trump is their meal ticket, to a certain extent,” Gertz said. “They grift off their relationship to him.” (A prime example: Stone auctioning off a Trump-autograph NFT.)

Trump’s own obsessive relationship with media has affected his pardon habits in profound ways. Trump’s second pardon, after Joe Arpaio, was of the former Navy sailor Kristian Saucier, who was convicted for the unauthorized retention of national defense information. The pardon came just days after Saucier appeared on Fox & Friends in 2018; his case had been held up as a contrast to the lack of repercussions for Hillary Clinton’s handling of classified material. Afterward, criminally convicted political figures would often go on Fox in hopes of getting their case before Trump.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Gertz doesn’t think that many of these individuals (save for Bannon) are powerful enough to lead their own movements. But he does think they contribute to something more powerful.

“The election-fraud narratives we saw in 2020, and now in 2024, benefit from the willingness of Trump supporters to say shameless things that were obviously false about the election. To that extent, anyone willing to do that benefits the movement as a whole,” Gertz said. “You need the Fox News hosts who can talk to an audience of zillions, but you also need the lower-level figures. You need everyone pulling on the oar.”

Advertisement

And in an effort to sustain their separate low-level projects, the Trump pardoned seem to boost one another for mutual benefit.

Advertisement

Roger Stone, who worked as a consultant for the Trump campaign and who was convicted of seven felonies for obstructing justice during the Russia investigation, hosts a radio show on WABC-AM, one of the biggest radio stations in New York. Donald Trump was the first guest on his show when it debuted in June 2023, but his guests have also included his fellow pardon recipients Flynn (on multiple times), Blagojevich (also a repeat guest), Papadopoulos (another repeat guest), Conrad Black, Paul Manafort, and D’Souza.

Advertisement

Similarly, D’Souza has hosted Blagojevich (discussing Democrats) and Flynn (discussing “corruption and political targeting at the highest levels of the intelligence agencies”) on his podcast, and after Papadopoulos’ wife released her film about Hunter Biden’s laptop, D’Souza was happy to have her on. When D’Souza screened his latest conspiracy-theory film at Mar-a-Lago, Bannon, Stone, Papadopoulos, and Flynn were all there.

Advertisement

Some of these figures seem to feel a sort of kinship toward one another. Kerik is apparently a close enough friend of Bannon that he, along with Blackwater founder Erik Prince, dropped Bannon off at prison on July 1. But Brendan Nyhan, a political scientist at Dartmouth College who studies political communication and the media, speculated that the Trump pardon recipients likely promote one another in a noticeable way simply because it’s the best way to publicize their proximity to power.

Related From Slate The List of People Trump Pardoned in Office Is Strangely Revealing Read More

“The set of people who hung around the Trump Hotel trying to be seen—it’s not a big group,” he said. “They probably all know each other, and they’re probably frenemies in a way people like that often are.”

Advertisement

But, Nyhan said, “they all have a joint stake in the continued flow of content.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

If Donald Trump loses the election in November, it will almost certainly depress the careers of the pardoned loyalists. “They can’t trade on their proximity to the most powerful person in the Republican Party forever,” Nyhan said. “He’s too old for that to last.”

But another way to look at it is: If Trump loses, they will have nothing stopping them from going all in on their already developed conspiracy theories of election fraud. Another “Stop the Steal” movement could be personally risky for these individuals, but arrests would mean more publicity, and another chance for the Trump-pardoned loyalists to convince their audiences that they went to prison for the movement—that they were good soldiers who made sacrifices and should be rewarded.

Advertisement

Gertz noted that some of these figures urge their audiences even today to be willing to go to jail or pay some other legal penalty to serve Trump’s noble cause. Several of these figures, including Bannon, Stone, and Flynn, have also touted their criminal charges as proof of what the movement calls for.

“The competition to play the victim card among his supporters is intense,” Nyhan said. “Bannon trumpeting his willingness to serve time—there’s a kind of competition for people to show just how committed they are to the cause.”

Trump himself became the first president in history to be indicted on federal charges, having been criminally charged in four separate cases. In MAGA world, these charges aren’t seen as liabilities. They are further proof of the politicization of the justice system and Trump’s own martyrdom.

“They see their convictions as proof of the conspiracy against them,” Mercieca said. In other words: “ ‘We must be right, because they’re always attacking us.’ ”

Related
NBC gave former President Donald Trump two minutes of free air time on Sunday night after his competitor, Vice President Kamala Harris, made a surprise appearance on “Saturday Night Live” this weekend.

Trump’s minute-long video message was aired as NBC broadcast a NASCAR event on Sunday and was played again during the network’s “Sunday Night Football” coverage for a total of two minutes of airtime.

“Hello to our great sports fans,” the former president said in the clip. “We’re two days away from the most important election in the history of our country we’ve got to save our country and it needs saving, it’s in very bad shape. … We’re going to end up in a depression based on what’s been happening. We’ve never seen anything like it at least in the last 40 years.”
Philadelphia DA sues Elon Musk over $1 million giveaway to registered voters

toggle caption Michael Swensen/Getty Images

On Monday, Philadelphia District Attorney Larry Krasner asked a state judge to stop Elon Musk’s $1 million giveaway to registered voters, calling the scheme “indisputably an unlawful lottery.”

Krasner brought the suit against Musk and his political action committee, America PAC.

“America PAC and Elon Musk are running an illegal lottery in Philadelphia (as well as throughout Pennsylvania),” the suit said.

“In other words, America PAC and Musk are lulling Philadelphia citizens – and others in the Commonwealth (and other swing states in the upcoming election) – to give up their personal identifying information and make a political pledge in exchange for the chance to win $1 million. That is a lottery.”

Sponsor Message

Musk announced the cash prize to voters in Pennsylvania during a stump speech earlier this month in support of former President Donald Trump.

“I have a surprise for you," Musk said shortly before bringing out a giant check. "We are going to be awarding $1 million to people who have signed the petition — every day, from now until the election.”

Almost immediately, the promise of a cash prize caught the attention of election law experts, who warned that incentivizing a person to vote violates federal law.

"If you look at the conditions, you must be a registered voter," UCLA election law professor Richard Hasen told NPR. "And so this is essentially a lottery that's open only to people who register to vote. So it’s either an incentive for someone to vote or it’s a reward. And either way, it violates federal law."

Several people in key swing states have already reportedly won the cash prize from signing the petition, which purports to support the constitutional promises of free speech and the right to bear arms.

Musk has fashioned himself as perhaps one of Trump’s most powerful allies in his second swing at returning to the White House.

The billionaire Tesla and SpaceX head, estimated to be the wealthiest man on the planet, launched America PAC as its sole donor with a $75 million cash infusion this summer.

Trump faces a close election race against the Democratic candidate, Vice President Harris.

Both candidates are racing to court voters in critical swing states in the eight days until Election Day. Polling shows the two candidates in a near-dead heat.
covers breaking and general assignment news as the weekend reporter at Vox. She previously worked at Business Insider covering the military and global conflicts.

Voters cast their ballots at an early voting location ahead of the upcoming general election in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, on October 25, 2024. Nathan Posner/Anadolu via Getty Images

Early voting numbers are showing a high number of Republicans casting their ballots ahead of Election Day, but that doesn’t mean an automatic victory for former President Donald Trump and Republicans down the ballot.

Historically, Democrats have been more likely to vote early in states where that’s an option, but with just a week before the election, they’re just barely ahead of Republican early votes nationally.

A partisan split in early voting was especially noticeable in the 2020 election, when Democrats were more hesitant to gather in public than Republicans due to the Covid-19 pandemic, and many states expanded early voting options. Trump routinely criticized early voting in 2020, which exacerbated that imbalance. Now, the pandemic is over, and Trump has undergone a shift: While he sometimes still disparages the practice of early voting by mail, he has also actively encouraged his followers to vote early.

Most states offer early voting either by mail or in person. Alabama and Mississippi are exceptions, though they offer absentee voting. (Kentucky and Missouri offer limited early voting options.) With early ballots coming into so many states — each with their own voting rules and time frames — early voting data can shift quickly. And that means we can only learn so much from it.

What early voting data can — and can’t — tell us

At this point in the early voting period, just about the only thing early voting data tells us for sure is who’s voting early.

“Among everyone who’s voted so far — not all of them, but by and large, they’re your super voters,” Michael McDonald, who runs the University of Florida Election Lab, told Vox. “They’ve made up their mind who they’re going to vote for, that’s who casts their ballot first.”

Usually, McDonald noted, those “super voters” tend to be Democrats. They also tend to be registered with a particular party and to be older voters. Women have historically been more likely to vote early; that trend is holding in the data available so far, McDonald said. The difference is, a greater proportion of those early women voters are Republicans.

And a larger number of Republicans voting early this year may not have any bearing on who ends up winning the election.

“I’m very cautious about interpreting early voting,” John Fortier, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, told Vox. “We’ve had change in trends in early voting, and different types of early voting — and then, of course, a very strange election [in] 2020. The basic trend, looking at the ’90s, 2000s, and up to the 2016 election is we just had a slow increase each election in the percentage of people who would vote by mail and also the number of people who would vote early in person.”

There do tend to be turnout trends in early voting, Fortier said, which he predicts will hold this cycle. “You often see a very big bump the first three or so days of the early voting period, especially if it’s a longer voting period. And then you see somewhat lower [turnout], and then there’s a big, big push in the last five, six days, as we are ramping up to Election Day.”

But both the 2020 election and Trump’s push to have his followers vote early have changed dynamics such that it’s hard to apply historical trends to early voting in 2024.

Mail-in ballots, which are the default option in some Western states like Colorado, Oregon, and Washington, represent another wrinkle entirely: The data lags behind in-person early voting information. And Democrats tend to be much more inclined to vote by mail, McDonald said.

Plus, logistical issues, such as the dates that mail-in ballots are sent out, can skew data further, as has happened in Clark County, Nevada. Early vote turnout appeared shockingly low for this point in the election — until it was discovered that ballots had been sent out later than in previous years and therefore would be returned and counted later in the early voting period.

“We see lots of Republicans voting in person early, but we know there’s going to be lots and lots of mail ballots,” especially in Western states like Washington and Oregon, where in-person voting is very limited,” McDonald said. “And we know that the Democrats are preferring to vote by that method, and we’ll start seeing those showing up later. And so it causes these imbalances to appear.”

Ultimately, Fortier said, we’ll likely see the highest turnout on Election Day itself, though overall this election might signal a shift to more early voting. Experts might be able to accurately predict which way certain states will go by their early voting numbers as early as this weekend, but that’s likely to be the exception to the rule.
In Texas last week, a man wore a Make America Great Again hat inside a polling location in San Antonio. Asked to remove it, the man allegedly ended up throwing several punches at a 69-year-old election worker.

Fortunately, the local precinct worker wasn’t seriously injured, and the suspect was arrested. But the incident served as a timely reminder about the kind of conditions election workers are facing in the United States this year. The New York Times reported on the “rising wave of threats to election workers.”

On Monday, the Justice Department unsealed a complaint against a man in Philadelphia who had vowed to skin alive and kill a party official recruiting volunteer poll watchers. On Tuesday, the police in Tempe, Ariz., arrested a man in connection with shootings at a Democratic campaign office, which resulted in no injuries, and other acts of political vandalism. On Wednesday, prosecutors charged a 61-year-old man from Tampa, Fla., with threatening an election official — on top of pending charges over menacing messages sent in the past five years. And on Thursday, police officers in Phoenix arrested a person in connection with a mailbox fire, damaging some 20 ballots in a Democratic stronghold.

“Our elections are made possible by the hard work and patriotism of election workers in communities across the country who are also our neighbors, relatives and friends, and they deserve to do this important work without being subjected to threats,” FBI Director Christopher Wray said in a statement last week. “The fact that election workers need to be worried about their security is incomprehensible and unacceptable.”

That’s true, but these are nevertheless the circumstances we find ourselves in as Americans in 2024. NBC News published a report last week noting that election officials nationwide are ramping up their security measures at polling places, “from beefing up law enforcement presence to donning bulletproof vests to deploying drones for surveillance amid an increasingly hostile environment.”

A few days earlier, The Wall Street Journal published a report out of Maricopa County, Arizona, where the local election headquarters “has become a fortress.”

On Election Day, as workers tabulate ballots behind new fencing and concrete barriers, drones will patrol the skies overhead, police snipers will perch on rooftops and mounted patrols will stand ready. Across the state, election workers have gone through active-shooter drills and learned to barricade themselves or wield fire hoses to repel armed mobs. At the ready are trauma kits containing tourniquets and bandages designed to pack chest wounds and stanch serious bleeding.

It’s difficult to fully appreciate the degree to which Donald Trump has poisoned American politics, but these reports are a good place to start.

As Rachel noted via Threads, highlighting the report out of Arizona, “Pop this in the time capsule for when it comes time to tell future generations about how awesome the Republican Party’s Trump years were.”
The assumption was that the Electoral College math would continue to favor the GOP and disadvantage Democrats. But the main theme as we barrel toward the 2024 presidential election seems to be “expect the unexpected.” Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump remain frustratingly close in poll after poll, opening the door to a world where he wins the popular vote but still loses the Electoral College and the presidency.

If that were to happen, it would upend years of assumptions about the shape of American democracy. It has been Democrats who have been clamoring the loudest for the vestigial organ that is the Electoral College to finally be excised from the Constitution. But even if Harris only wins thanks to an arcane formula devised over 200 years ago, there’s still no valid reason for keeping such an undemocratic institution around.

There’s every indication that this year will be close — but what if it didn’t all come down to just a handful of voters in fewer than 20% of the states in the union?

Harris and Trump are statistically deadlocked in many vital swing states, with neither holding a clear edge outside of the margin of error in most polls. But the eight states that are seen as crucial in the final days of the race aren’t important because they’re the most populous. Rather, the reason places like Georgia and Pennsylvania hold such outsize significance is that they’re competitive enough to tilt the Electoral College to one candidate or the other.

We’ve already recently seen Democrats outperform in the national popular vote versus the final Electoral College tally — twice. When Trump won in 2016, it was with a narrow Electoral College win but lacking a popular mandate; his loss in 2020 was likewise a national blowout but intensely close in the swing states that tipped President Joe Biden over the edge. To wit: Trump won Wisconsin by just under 23,000 votes in 2016 and lost it by around 21,000 votes in 2020.

There’s every indication that this year will be just as close — but what if it didn’t all come down to just a handful of voters in fewer than 20% of the states in the union? I’ve long argued that the Electoral College has been warped far beyond the original intent of the Constitution’s drafters. As I wrote after the 2020 election, the version of the Electoral College that Alexander Hamilton envisioned, one where “‘there will be a constant probability of seeing the station filled by characters pre-eminent for ability and virtue,’ has basically never operated as designed.”

Instead, the rise of political parties gave way to the current system. Voters on Election Day are really selecting either Democratic or Republican electors who’ve promised to cast their vote for their respective party’s nominee. It’s a convoluted practice that adds an unnecessary layer between the people and the presidency. Moreover, as Rep. Jamie Raskin, D-Md., said in a 2022 interview, “there are so many curving byways and nooks and crannies in the Electoral College that there are opportunities for a lot of strategic mischief.”

Trump tried to exploit those oddities in his failed attempt to remain in office after his 2020 loss. But there has been no real surge of energy to abolish the Electoral College as a result. In fact, the closest the country has come to doing so was in 1970, after Richard Nixon ran away with the electoral vote but won the popular vote by less than 1% of the national total. The resulting constitutional amendment passed the House but was filibustered in the Senate, an instance where an antidemocratic institution was preserved only thanks to an antidemocratic process.

The fact that we even need to do this kind of math to try to determine who might win the presidency is absurd.

With the electoral system still firmly in place for next week’s election, it would take a very specific set of circumstances to see Harris prevail while losing the popular vote to Trump. As The New York Times’ Nate Cohn explained last month, Trump’s advantage in the Electoral College has been fading as the gap between Harris’ lead in national polls and the so-called “tipping point” state have narrowed. This is possible because Harris is faring well in the northern battlegrounds of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin while Trump has been eating at the margins in noncompetitive states like New York.

The fact that we even need to do this kind of math to try to determine who might win the presidency is absurd. The current mechanics disenfranchise urban conservatives and rural liberals alike, substituting geography for political agency. A world where the direct popular vote was determinant would force candidates to compete for every vote in every state. It would be another much-needed step in America’s centurieslong transformation from an amalgamation of independent states into a single national unit.

The question then would become whether Harris would be running a different campaign than she is now without the hyperfocus on swing states. And given her shift to the center and intense focus on peeling off moderate Republicans, I can’t say that she would. Nor would Trump be much predisposed to break for the middle in that situation — not that he’d have won in 2016 without the Electoral College’s assistance.

And the idea that Trump could win the popular vote while losing the Electoral College should not serve as a deterrent to its abolition. If that is truly the will of the American people, let it be on their heads directly that he be returned to the White House. Let it have been a true race for the hearts and minds of the full electorate that ends the American experiment with democracy, not an adherence to the scribblings of aristocrats scared of their countrymen’s power.
To the men who love us, let me just try to paint a picture of what it will feel like if America, the wealthiest nation on Earth, keeps revoking basic care from its women, and how it will affect every single woman in your life.

Your girlfriend could be the one in legal jeopardy if she needs a pill from out-of-state or overseas, or if she has to travel across state lines because the local clinic closed up.

Your wife and mother could be the ones at higher risk of dying from undiagnosed cervical cancer because they have no access to regular gynecological care.

Your daughter could be the one too terrified to call the doctor if she’s bleeding during an unexpected pregnancy.

Your niece could be the one miscarrying in her bathtub after the hospital turned her away.

This will not just affect women. It will affect you and your sons.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

NEW YORK (AP) — Uncertainty reigns entering the final full week of the 2024 campaign with Democrat Kamala Harris and Republican Donald Trump locked in a fiercely competitive presidential contest. What happens in the coming days will be pivotal in deciding the winner.

Here’s what we’re watching this week:

Can Trump stay on message (relatively speaking)?

Even before the week began, Trump’s campaign risked being knocked off course by controversy. A rally at New York City’s Madison Square Garden late Sunday that was meant to serve as a closing message was instead overshadowed by racist insults, including a comedian who called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage.”

Advertisement

And with eight days to go until Election Day, history suggests Trump is virtually guaranteed to say or do something else controversial in the final stretch. The only question is whether it will break through.

If there’s one thing we know, it’s that Trump cannot help himself. He’s been using authoritarian-style rhetoric in recent days to suggest that his Democratic opponents, whom he calls “ the enemy within,” are more dangerous to the nation than the threat posed by Russia and China.

Democrats will be combing through every Trump interview and public appearance for something similar to exploit. There are also multiple ongoing criminal investigations into Trump, who has already been convicted of 34 felony charges, that could reveal new information.

Yet Democrats are the first to admit that voter opinions of Trump is so hardened that it would take something truly stunning to change the course of the election.

Advertisement

There is precedent for a final-week stunner, however. Remember, it was Oct. 28, 2016, when former FBI Director James Comey sent a letter to Congress indicating that federal investigators learned of new emails pertinent to the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server.

Will Harris’ closing message harness Democrats’ anxiety?

It would be an understatement to describe Democrats as anxious as Election Day looms. But there was a deliberate effort by Harris’ senior team over the weekend to project optimism to help temper the fear.

Harris senior adviser Jen O’Malley Dillon predicted victory on MSNBC on Sunday: “We are confident we’re going to win this thing,” she said. “We’re seeing extraordinary enthusiasm. This is going to be a close race, and our campaign is exactly where we want to be.”

Harris will try to alleviate Democratic anxiety further on Tuesday when she delivers her “closing argument” at the Ellipse, the same spot near the White House where Trump spoke on Jan. 6, 2021 shortly before his supporters attacked the Capitol.

Harris is expected to focus her remarks on the danger Trump poses to U.S. democracy. She has called her Republican rival “a fascist” in recent days. And she’s been joined by an unlikely ally, Trump’s former chief of staff John Kelly, who has also described Trump as a fascist recently.

Advertisement

But she’s expected to hit broader themes as well, encouraging voters to look behind her at the White House and imagine who will be sitting at the Resolute Desk at a moment of great consequence. She’s aiming to drive home the stakes of the Nov. 5 election for undecided voters — especially moderate Republicans who may be uncomfortable with Trump’s divisive leadership and extreme rhetoric. And while Harris’ team is betting that there is a significant number of moderates who can still be persuaded, progressive Democrats are worried she’s not focused enough on economic issues in the campaign’s closing days.

Democratic anxiety, we have learned, may be a fact of life.

Where will they go?

The candidates’ evolving travel schedules will tell us much about the battlegrounds that will matter most on Election Day.

Here’s what we know for sure: Harris and Trump are aggressively competing in just seven swing states that will ultimately decide the election. They are the three so-called “Blue Wall” states — Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin — in addition to Arizona, Georgia, Nevada and North Carolina.

For a political perspective, however, not every one of the seven is created equal.

Harris spent Sunday in Pennsylvania, which may be the election’s biggest prize. Harris is next scheduled to go to Michigan. And after Tuesday’s closing argument in Washington, she plans to visit North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin on Wednesday alone. She heads to Nevada and Arizona on Thursday.

What do we know about Trump’s schedule? He’s booked to host at least one rally every day next week: Monday in Georgia, Tuesday in Pennsylvania, Wednesday in Wisconsin, Thursday in Nevada, Friday in Wisconsin again and Saturday in Virginia.

Advertisement

But as a reminder, these schedules are likely to change based on the campaigns’ intelligence on the ground.

Will the early voting surge continue?

More than 41 million votes have already been cast in the election nationwide. Democrats generally have an advantage in early voting, but so far, at least, Republicans are participating at a much higher rate than they have in the past.

The question: Will it last?

Trump, of course, has for years encouraged his supporters to cast only in-person ballots on Election Day. The practice put the GOP at a significant disadvantage. He largely reversed course in recent months as he and his party acknowledged the obvious benefit of being able to bank their votes as early as possible.

Because of the Republican participation, the early turnout was breaking records last week in swing states such as Georgia and North Carolina.

But with the GOP more focused on “election integrity” rather than a traditional get-out-the-vote operation, it’s unclear whether the uptick in Republican early voting will continue. Democrats hope it won’t.

Advertisement

How hard will Trump work to undermine election results?

History may one day decide that the most significant thing Trump said in the closing days of the 2024 election is the thing that many voters barely notice anymore: his persistent warnings that this election is rigged against him.

Indeed, as Election Day approaches, Trump is increasingly warning his supporters that he will lose on Nov. 5 only if his political opponents cheat. Such statements have no basis in fact. There was no evidence of significant voter fraud in the 2020 election, which Trump lost, and there is no evidence that Trump’s adversaries can or will rig this election against him either.

Still, Trump’s unfounded warnings make an already tense and violent election season even more fraught. And there are real threats that foreign adversaries — especially Russia, China and Iran — will meddle in the election.

At the same time, the Republican National Committee has invested tens of millions of dollars into an operation to mobilize thousands of polling place monitors, poll workers and attorneys to serve as “election integrity” watchdogs. Democrats are worried that the effort could lead to harassment of election workers and undermine trust in the vote.

Both parties are aggressively preparing for long legal battles no matter who wins.

Will wars in the Middle East shift the focus?

U.S. presidential elections are rarely shaped by foreign affairs, but the wars in the Middle East have been escalating at the very moment that millions of voters are preparing to cast ballots.

Advertisement

It’s still unclear how Iran will respond to Israel’s unusually public airstrikes across Iran on Friday but Israel did not target oil or nuclear sites, a sign that a much more serious escalation may have been avoided. In another indication that this conflict may not spiral out of control, the Islamic Republic insisted the strikes caused only “limited damage” and the messaging from Iranian state-run media downplayed the attacks.

If the region spirals further toward all-out regional war or holds steady at an already devastating and destabilizing level of violence could also determine the extent to which the Middle East conflict shapes the U.S. election.
The Alien Enemies Act of 1798 is the last of the notorious Alien and Sedition Acts to remain on the books, and it is suddenly in the headlines. It may be tempting to dismiss the possibility that a rarely enforced 18th-century law that specifically provides that it can only be used when there is “a declared war between the United States and any foreign nation or government” could be employed to deploy the military on U.S. soil to seize, detain, and deport immigrants. This, however, is exactly what former President Donald J. Trump has very specifically pledged to do if elected. On this week’s episode of Amicus, Dahlia Lithwick was joined by Katherine Yon Ebright, from the Brennan Center’s Liberty and National Security Program, to discuss whether Trump could dust off this 226-year-old statute to carry out his promised mass deportations of noncitizens.

Dahlia Lithwick: The language of invasion is being invoked, and it’s being invoked in ways that are getting, in some cases, a very warm reception in the courts. Can you explain why this language of invasion is being deployed? It’s not just rhetoric, right? There are deliberate legal purposes.

Katherine Yon Ebright: The actual promise to use the Alien Enemies Act for mass deportations was first raised by Trump, and even before that, by anti-immigration groups in the late summer of 2023. This is a wartime authority, and I think people aren’t taking seriously the possibility that this kind of wartime authority could be misappropriated into our relative peacetime context.

Advertisement

To contextualize this within the letter of the law, even before people were talking about the Alien Enemies Act on the 2024 election campaign trail, you had Texas Gov. Greg Abbott trying to take the reins on immigration enforcement. Immigration enforcement is an explicitly federal prerogative. It’s not something that the states can do unless the Congress asks the states to be involved, or the attorney general asks for the states to be involved. With what Texas calls Operation Lone Star, Texas began taking these steps that were very close to border management. For instance, putting a concertina-wire-laced buoy in the Rio Grande, and also passing a law called S.B. 4 that looked a lot like encroaching on federal prerogatives. Texas said the reason that they could do that was because they had been “actually invaded,” and that migration cartel activity was an “invasion.” In Article 1, Section 10 of the U.S. Constitution, it says that the states can’t “engage in war” unless they’re actually invaded.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

What Texas Gov. Abbott was doing was communicating: This immigration enforcement is actually our way of engaging in war, because building that concertina wire, that’s our protection against this invasion. So this rhetorical invasion has been amplified to obfuscate where political rhetoric ends and where the law begins and ends in order to conflate the two.

What we’ve seen in the context of what’s going on in Texas is there actually are some judges on the 5th Circuit who are trying to say, Yes, migration is an invasion, Texas can claim that it’s been actually invaded and thus can engage in war by managing the border and expelling people from the country, even though under long-standing Supreme Court jurisprudence, those are federal roles, not state roles.

Advertisement

Related From Slate Three Trump Judges Just Issued a Shock Ruling That Could Wreak Havoc on the Election Read More

The Alien Enemies Act can be used in times of declared war. That is the primary use case for this law, but the language is actually a little bit broader than that. The statute allows the president to invoke the law, not only in times of explicitly declared war with a congressional declaration of war, but also in times of presidentially identified invasion or predatory incursion.

And so here we have the same word, weaponized in the constitutional context by Greg Abbott and [Attorney General] Ken Paxton in Texas in the past two years, now deployed by Trump and his allies in the context of the Alien Enemies Act. When we have this rhetoric about gangs from Venezuela as invaders who have conquered Aurora, or describing Mexican cartels as invaders who have conquered cities in California, it’s not necessarily bounded by how the mayors in those municipalities view the facts. It’s much more, I think, driven by this desire to conflate the rhetoric and the legal meaning. And that’s what makes this law, combined with the rhetoric, so concerning.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

While you’ve been chewing over this question for more than a year, of whether the Alien Enemies Act could really be exploited in some fashion to do either mass detentions or mass deportations, as Trump is promising, there’s been a pretty knee-jerk reaction in the legal commentary of: This could never stand, it’s not an invasion, no declared war, it just couldn’t happen.

I think your work provides two responses to that. One is: Well, it couldn’t happen until it could. And the second is: There’s a long and deep history of treating this question of invasion and war as a political question that is therefore nonjudiciable. The court could just say: This is for the political branches. I’m hearing from you that that’s a very real concern—regardless of the plain terms of the statute.

Advertisement

So for centuries, the courts have identified certain sensitive foreign policy and national security questions as questions that are out of the realm of what the court should be engaged on. There’s no judicially manageable standard for figuring out what exactly is a foreign nation or government, which is one of the prerequisites for invoking the Alien Enemies Act, right? The invasion or the predatory incursion has to be perpetrated by a foreign nation or government. The courts have said, “That’s a political question, that’s not for us to decide, that’s the president’s decision.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

At least [since] the 1990s, we’ve also seen the courts really taking a back seat on the question of what is an invasion. After the 1973 War Powers resolution was passed (which allowed the Congress to force the president to withdraw from unauthorized hostilities), the court said, “What are hostilities? That’s not really our business to decide. Maybe if it gets to the threshold of the Vietnam War, then we could say that those are hostilities, but things below that very, very clear threshold? That’s not our job.” In the 1990s, you had a series of court cases brought—typically by Republican governors based on Article 4 of the Constitution—which guaranteed not only a Republican government, but also the protection of states against invasion.

Advertisement

Advertisement

These governors argued in court that migration was an invasion. While there were some courts that said, “That doesn’t seem right on the merits,” all of the courts that ever received that kind of claim dismissed the claim, not because it was wrong on the merits, but instead because whether or not an invasion existed was a political question, and that was outside of the scope of what they could decide.

Advertisement

They said, “We’re beholden to the decisions of the political branches, the president, and the Congress on this kind of issue.” Fast-forward to today, and what’s happening in the 5th Circuit and in Texas: In some of these cases that concern whether Texas has been actually invaded, a debate rages about whether the courts can even look at the merits of Texas’ claim. We’ve seen both Democrat- and Republican-appointed judges who have been sympathetic to the idea that this is a political question and the courts have no business wading into the political thicket here.

Advertisement

One last thing that I’ll flag is that when Texas first started making that argument, in the first case that the Department of Justice sued Texas under, the DOJ itself had argued that whether or not there was an invasion was a political question, and they argued that knocked Texas’ “invasion” argument out of Texas’ defense in the case.

The DOJ has since come around and realized that maybe it should contest on the merits and ask the courts to reject on the merits this migration-as-invasion claim. I really appreciate that shift in the DOJ tactics, because I think it’s very important to actually get this question addressed on the merits.

My concern for the Alien Enemies Act, but also for the 5th Circuit litigation over Texas’ border tactics, is that even when there is clearly no military invasion, and there is no armed attack of the kind that’s necessary to trigger this language, whether in the Constitution or in the Alien Enemies Act, the courts will say, “Not our business. It’s not our ability to make that kind of judgment.” I have a lot of concern for where we may be headed if there is a pretextual and abusive invocation of the Alien Enemies Act.
New York CNN —

Some of the most powerful people in this year’s election cycle are the clippers.

Yes, the video-clippers. They watch campaign events and cable newscasts for hours on end, looking for the standout moments — those worth clipping and sharing with millions of people via social media.

The campaigns for Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump both have teams of clippers. So do outside political groups like American Bridge 21st Century, a liberal super PAC. But the most impactful video publishers are frequently people who work from home on their own, shaping the news cycle one snappy clip at a time.

Trump’s rally Sunday at Madison Square Garden featuring extreme and hateful rhetoric was the latest proof point of the video-clipping phenomenon.

Racist and obscene comments from some of the event’s early speakers were clipped and flagged by popular X users like @Acyn and Aaron Rupar. Both accounts, for instance, posted clips of comedian Tony Hinchcliffe likening Puerto Rico to a “floating island of garbage.”

The clips went viral, and Kamala Harris’s campaign capitalized by promoting the vice president’s pledge to help Puerto Ricans. (Coincidentally, earlier in the day, Harris had announced plans for an opportunity economy task force for the island.) Several Puerto Rican superstars posted support for Harris on Sunday night – and some shared the offensive Hinchcliffe clip too.

After the rally, a Trump campaign spokeswoman said “this joke does not reflect the views of President Trump or the campaign.” But the video clips suggested otherwise, since Hinchcliffe was speaking from a lectern bearing the former president’s name when he spoke.

Social media video-clipping was a factor in the 2016 and 2020 elections, too, but as audiences increasingly shift online, the practice has taken on greater prominence this election season. At a Saturday night rally in Michigan, Michelle Obama even referred to it as a campaign tactic; she encouraged rallygoers to “send a video of what I’ve just said” to voters who still need persuading.

There are a handful of media commentators and activists who post day and night and have outsized influence because the moments they catch and clip inspire news stories, TV segments, and fundraising campaigns.

In late July, one week after Trump picked Ohio Sen. JD Vance as his running mate, former Republican stalwart turned anti-Trump crusader Ron Filipkowski posted a clip of Vance on “Tucker Carlson Tonight” in 2021 assailing “childless cat ladies.” That blast from the recent past generated days of news coverage and widespread criticism of Vance.

Most clips aren’t so cataclysmic, but evidence of the “clippers election” can be found all throughout the campaign season.

Unflattering clips of President Joe Biden during the June 27 presidential debate hosted by CNN ricocheted around the web and cemented impressions about the president before the debate even ended.

To this day, snippets of Biden appearing aloof are a staple of the Republican National Committee’s @RNCResearch account on X.

On the left, numerous X accounts exist mostly to promote clips of Trump sounding unhinged.

Video-clippers drive news coverage because the moments they post get circulated among reporters, producers and assignment editors. The clips also get reposted across TikTok, Instagram, YouTube, and other platforms. In effect, the clippers function as an early warning system for newsrooms, surfacing remarks, noise or nonsense that’s about to get a whole lot of attention.

Rupar, who previously wrote for Vox, now produces his own Substack newsletter, Public Notice. He said he has been “live-clipping” Trump rallies since 2017 because of the inherent news value.

“MAGA rallies are ugly affairs, but it’s difficult to capture that in a traditional news writeup,” Rupar told CNN. “By breaking up the rallies into clips and highlighting the most newsworthy moments, people get an unfiltered view of Trumpism without having to suffer through his Castro-like speeches.”

The day before Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally, Rupar posted numerous clips of Harris and former first lady Michelle Obama speaking in Michigan that garnered millions of views, according to X. Then he highlighted Vance’s appearances on Sunday morning public affairs programs and racked up even more views.

Pro-Trump accounts are equally busy. Trump’s recent appearance on Joe Rogan’s podcast, for example, was dissected, clipped and remixed by both cheerleaders and critics of the former president.

Trump’s campaign account on X, dubbed @TrumpWarRoom, pushes out promotional video clips day in and day out. The Harris campaign does the same with @KamalaHQ. As a CNN analyst, my TV appearances have been clipped by both accounts, and it can be a disorienting experience, since social media viewers aren’t getting the full context of the TV segment. But once you’re clipped, there is little you can do about it. The clippers have the power.
I am Puerto Rican, and I am tired.

When comedian Tony Hinchcliffe joked Sunday that Puerto Rico was “a floating island of garbage” at the start of a Donald Trump rally at Madison Square Garden, I was not surprised.

I knew this was just the latest example of a risible American tradition: using “comedy” to insult Puerto Ricans. It’s raw and insulting.

Puerto Ricans have heard these kinds of excuses and apologies before.

Much of the coverage of Hinchcliffe’s racism has been focused on next week’s presidential election. The Trump campaign quickly distanced itself, saying, “This joke does not reflect the views of President Trump or the campaign.” Hinchcliffe tried to backtrack almost immediately by saying that he vacations in Puerto Rico and loves the island.

Puerto Ricans have heard these kinds of excuses and apologies before. The fact is that Hinchcliffe was at that Trump rally, and anyone trying to spin it any other way just doesn’t get it and never will.

Vice President Kamala Harris made sure Monday to connect Hinchcliffe to the former president, saying: “This is not new about [Trump], by the way. What he did last night was not a discovery. It is just more of the same and maybe more vivid than usual.” Harris and her team hope the remark will redound to their advantage. The campaign’s plan for Puerto Rico went public the same day as Hinchcliffe’s failed comedy routine.

The disaster of Hurricane Maria and the Trump administration’s botched response has prompted Puerto Ricans to be more vocal about their role in the American political system. About 500,000 Puerto Ricans live in the battleground state of Pennsylvania. During Trump’s rally, music superstar Bad Bunny endorsed Harris — joining other Puerto Rican celebrities like Jennifer Lopez and Ricky Martin — and shared her newly announced proposals for the island on his social media accounts.

The Harris campaign is doing what campaigns do. But viewing Hinchcliffe’s words merely through a political lens misses the bigger picture. Puerto Rico, a spoil of an American war victory from 1898, still has a complicated colonial relationship with the U.S. In the 19th century, images mocking backward Puerto Ricans as savages were the norm in the U.S. Things have barely changed since: To other Americans, Puerto Ricans have always been seen as dirty, backward, ignorant and second-class citizens.

Nothing has really changed when it comes to respecting Puerto Ricans for who they are.

It’s as if Puerto Ricans have never been extricated from the “West Side Story” stereotypes of the late 1950s when the Broadway smash became the defining image of Puerto Ricans for most Americans. Puerto Rican characters singing “Puerto Rico, you dirty island…” has always been wrong. Even as the musical went through some more modern revisions to clean it up a bit, the damage was already done. The prejudicial portrayal has never left the American cultural lexicon. For as long as I can remember, “jokes” about us Puerto Ricans have always failed. Americans never seem to learn.

In 1998, during the final season of “Seinfeld,” NBC had to apologize for an episode in which the character Cosmo Kramer burned a Puerto Rican flag because the city’s Puerto Rican Day Parade was causing too much traffic. (NBC and MSNBC are both owned by NBC Universal.) The backlash from Puerto Ricans was swift. In fact, that episode was removed from the syndicated show’s TV schedule, though sadly it is today available to stream on Netflix.

In 2012, Puerto Rican activists expressed fury at the ABC sitcom “Work It,” when Puerto Rican actor Amuary Nolasco’s character said, “I’m Puerto Rican. I would be great at selling drugs.” Eventually, the show was canceled.

Puerto Ricans are still working to call out those who continue to disparage us. And we’re exhausted. Nothing has really changed when it comes to respecting Puerto Ricans for who they are and what they have done to contribute to American democracy, even when that very same democracy has perpetuated a relationship that might offer us American citizenship but still keeps us a colony.

This is not about how many Puerto Ricans have died in wars for American causes or how some of the country’s biggest celebrities are Puerto Rican.

There is something deeper here that we, as Americans, do not want to confront.

More than 125 years after the American empire conquered their island, Puerto Ricans are still a punch line. The Trump campaign would love for this to all go away, while the Harris campaign will use it to get out more Boricua voters. But this is much bigger than Republican or Democratic support and who will win Puerto Rican voters in 2024. Both parties have perpetually supported a colonial system that has done little to improve Puerto Rico’s fortunes. For too long, other Americans have thought of Puerto Ricans as a joke. Now, we’re demanding respect.
One of those moments came from comedian Tony Hinchcliffe who said, "I don’t know if you know this, but there’s literally a floating island of garbage in the middle of the ocean right now. I think it’s called Puerto Rico."
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Tucker Carlson on Sunday falsely said Democratic nominee Kamala Harris is Samoan and Malaysian in a racist rant tinged by conspiracy theory. (Watch the video below.)

Harris’ mother is from India and her father from Jamaica.

But Carlson appeared to be using Samoa and Malaysia as sarcastic plug-ins for nonwhite nations to dig at Harris’ racial background. Republican nominee Donald Trump and allies have been doing that with greater intensity since the vice president received the nomination.

Advertisement

In a speech before Trump took the stage at Madison Square Garden, the disgraced Fox News alum also took other pages out of the GOP playbook. He insulted Harris’ intelligence and preemptively sowed doubt about the election results in case she wins.

“It’s gonna be pretty hard to look at us and say, ’You know what? Kamala Harris, she got 85 million votes because she’s just so impressive as the first Samoan-Malaysian, low-IQ, former California prosecutor ever to be elected president,” he sneered. “It was just a groundswell of popular support, and anyone who thinks otherwise is just a freak or a criminal.”

“She’s not impressive,” Carlson said. “It’s very hard for me to believe the rest of us are going to say, ‘You know what, [MSNBC host] Joe Scarborough, you’re right, you’re right. She won fair and square because she’s just so impressive!’”

“I don’t think so,” he added.

Tucker: it's going to be pretty tough for them.. say.. Kamala Harris, she got 85 million votes because she's so impressive. As the first is a Samoan Malaysian low I.Q. former California prosecutor ever to be elected president.. pic.twitter.com/s0Vtbzhbgp — Acyn (@Acyn) October 27, 2024

Advertisement

It was not so long ago as Fox News’ prime-time star that Carlson promoted falsehoods about the 2020 election and downplayed the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection as mostly “peaceful.” Privately, however, he expressed hatred for Trump and skepticism of the voting machine lies that eventually stung Fox News in a lawsuit.

He got canned after the conservative channel agreed to pay Dominion Voting Systems $787.5 million because it spread misinformation that the company was rigging votes in favor of Trump’s opponent Joe Biden.

He’s now a host on X ― and a warmup act for a man he seemed to secretly loathe at one time.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Tens of millions of dollars in television ads have made it clear what Democrats want their closing message to be: Donald Trump will restrict abortion rights, cut taxes for the rich and slash away at Americans’ health care.

But getting a 24/7 news cycle to focus on positions Trump and other Republicans have held for decades is a tough sell, particularly when the news media can (rightly!) focus more on warnings coming from Trump’s top aides suggesting he has a fondness for Adolf Hitler and has fascist tendencies more broadly, or on his end-stage rally in New York City featuring a bevy of racist, sexist and generally offensive commentary.

Advertisement

Vice President Kamala Harris hopes she can spend the next week linking Trump’s autocratic ambitions to his right-wing views on abortion and economics in the minds of voters, a process her campaign said could be summed up with a simple line she deployed during a rally in Georgia on Thursday, when she asked attendees to imagine who would be sitting in the Oval Office in a few months.

“It’s either Donald Trump in there, stewing over his enemies list, or me, working for you, checking off my to-do list,” Harris said to cheers from the crowd.

Trump has an enemies list.



I have a to-do list. pic.twitter.com/rdifXb95Dy — Kamala Harris (@KamalaHarris) October 24, 2024

As the campaign enters its final days, Harris’ success in a nail-biter of an election may come down to how well she and her allies can combine these two very different cases against Trump, and deliver each message to the persuadable voters who need to hear it.

Advertisement

Striking the right balance is causing some anxiety among Harris supporters, with Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) warning about Democratic campaigns not focusing enough on the economic struggles of the working class. (Sanders, for what it’s worth, delivered similar warnings in 2020 and 2022.)

“She has to start talking more to the needs of working-class people,” Sanders told The Associated Press last week. “I wish this had taken place two months ago. It is what it is.”

Harris, talking to reporters on Friday before her rally in Houston, indicated she was confident her campaign could deliver both messages at once.

“One of the things that I love about the American people is we can hold many thoughts at once,” she said, before listing “bringing down costs,” “fighting for our democracy” and “fighting for the freedom of people to make decisions about their own body” as among her top priorities.

In the closing week of the election, Vice President Kamala Harris is trying to strike the right balance in highlighting Donald Trump's autocratic ambitions as well as his right-wing views on abortion and economics. Andrew Harnik via Getty Images

Advertisement

A memo from FF PAC, the main super PAC backing Harris, sent to Democratic operatives on Friday warned against focusing too much on Trump’s fascist threat, noting its internal testing has found it less effective than focusing on Harris’ plans for the economy, including expanding the child tax credit and building hundreds of thousands more homes to lower housing costs. The memo was first reported by The New York Times.

In a statement to the paper, the president of the super PAC — which typically does not comment on its strategy or even alert reporters to ads it is putting out — downplayed the memo and explicitly complimented Harris’ rhetoric.

The PAC’s research “shows people that the most effective way of using Trump’s words and behavior is tying them to consequences in voters’ lives,” Chauncey McLean wrote. “That’s what Kamala Harris does every day by comparing her to-do list with his enemies list, for example.”

The Harris campaign released two ads on Thursday night using the audio of John Kelly’s interviews with The New York Times about Trump being a fascist to attack the former president, though it’s unclear how often either ad has run on television. In recent months, the campaign has occasionally released ads more focused on Trump as a threat to democracy without running them extensively on television.

Advertisement

And other members of the Democratic ecosystem seem to have more faith in using Kelly as a messenger to attack Trump. Blueprint, a centrist Democratic polling outfit, found in a survey earlier this month that Harris’ most effective closing argument involves citing how many of Trump’s Cabinet members and other Republicans have refused to endorse the former president.

Jennifer O’Malley Dillon, the campaign’s chair, agreed in a television interview on Sunday.

“When someone like John Kelly stands up and speaks about what it was like to serve under Donald Trump, speaks about how he clearly wants unchecked power, the American people are not comfortable with that,” she said on the MSNBC show hosted by former White House press secretary Jen Psaki. “It’s really important when people who are close to Donald Trump speak out about it, and we’ve seen that across all of our data.”

But ultimately it may not be her own economic plans or Trump’s fascist threat that provides Harris’ most potent closing message. Her campaign used the Friday night rally, where the vice president appeared alongside Beyoncé and Willie Nelson, to highlight how the Lone Star State’s ban on abortion could soon come to swing states under a Trump presidency.

Priorities USA, a super PAC focused on digital advertising, told reporters on Friday they were confident abortion messaging was breaking through with the persuadable voters and get-out-the-vote targets still available to Harris — people who tend to be younger, female and more likely to be Black or Latino. In the group’s polling, the number one issue voters said they had heard about in advertising in the past few weeks was abortion rights.

“We feel really good about the messages that people can recall hearing, because they are messages that they tend to trust [Democrats] more on,” said Nick Ahamed, the group’s deputy executive director.

Advertisement

At the same time, the group also warned Democrats of one particular line of attack, saying focus on the idea Trump is “exhausted” or acting strangely has not helped Democrats much.

“When we talk about Trump and fascism, authoritarianism, as long as we’re connecting that to what it means for voters, we’re in fine territory,” Ahamed told reporters. “The concern is more that we’re just talking about him not showing up at rallies or canceling press conferences or doing weird dancing.”

The Harris campaign has a second major rally planned on Tuesday night on the National Mall in Washington, not far from where Trump spoke to a crowd on Jan. 6, 2021, before they marched to the Capitol. While the location would seem to indicate a focus on Trump’s threats to democracy, O’Malley Dillon previewed a speech with a distinct focus on economics.

“The vice president is going to talk about how this election is not about her or Donald Trump, it’s about the American people, and about her to-do list,” O’Malley Dillon said. “She’s going to be thinking about how she can bring costs down for your family, how she can make housing more affordable, how she’s going to protect health care and Social Security and Medicare.”

Surrounding the Tuesday address, the campaign is mostly set to pursue a more traditional barnstorming of the seven states considered the core of the electoral battleground: Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Michigan, Arizona, Georgia, Nevada and North Carolina. Polling in all seven states indicates their electoral votes are up for grabs.

Advertisement

Harris and her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, will hit all of the states over the next four days, including a joint appearance in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on Monday, with Harris hitting North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin on Wednesday, and Nevada and Arizona on Thursday.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

NEW YORK — Donald Trump brought his fascist campaign for presidency to the heart of midtown Manhattan on Sunday, taking the stage at Madison Square Garden and looking out over a crowd of his fanatically loyal Red Hats.

With nine days left until the election, the campaign stop seemed like a finale ― one more grand provocation meant to show that Trump could win this thing, that he could walk into enemy territory months after a would-be assassin’s bullet pierced his ear, garnering enough supporters in this progressive, diverse city to fill up the “the world’s most famous arena.”

Advertisement

And that he could do it even after running one of the most racist presidential campaigns in history, and even though earlier this year a jury downtown convicted him on 34 charges of illegally influencing the 2016 election through hush money payments to a porn star, and even though earlier this year the New York state attorney general won a $450 million civil fraud judgment against him.

Back in 2016, when he began his rise to the White House, Trump boasted that he could stand a few blocks from here, in the middle of Fifth Avenue, and “shoot somebody, and I wouldn’t lose any voters, OK? It’s, like, incredible.” Eight years later, Trump’s observation, amidst his daily barrage of lies and exaggerations, seems more true than ever. His base of white conservative supporters are not abandoning him, no matter his latest scandal, and the polls in crucial swing states are tightening.

The arena Sunday was packed to the brim with his adoring fans, with thousands more outside on the sidewalk watching the rally on a big screen or on their phones. At one point, so many were sitting on a construction fence that it collapsed and fell beneath their weight.

“Kamala, you’re fired!” Trump said at the beginning of his speech. “Get out!”

“That is a lot of fake news!” he said a short time later to big applause, pointing at the journalists gathered in the press section of the arena.

Advertisement

Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump arrives to speak during a campaign rally at Madison Square Garden on Sunday in New York. Julia Demaree Nikhinson via Associated Press

Then Trump pivoted to the bread-and-butter messaging of his campaign: falsely painting immigrants as inherently criminal. Kamala Harris, he said, has “resettled them into your communities to prey upon innocent American citizens. But the day I take the oath of office, the migrant invasion of our country ends and the restoration of our country begins!”

Outside the arena, a man watching the speech yelled “disgusting!” when Trump spoke about this nonexistent “invasion” of immigrants. “Send them back Donnie!” he screamed.

The former president continued: “On day one I will launch the largest deportation program in American history and get the criminals out,” he said. “I will rescue every city in town that has been invaded and conquered, and we will put these vicious and bloodthirsty criminals in jail, kick them the hell out of our country as fast as possible. The United States is now an occupied country, but it will soon be an occupied country no longer. ... On Nov. 5, 2024, nine days from now, it will be Liberation Day in America.”

Throughout his speech, Trump paused so the audience could watch TV news clips about crimes committed by immigrants on the jumbotron.

Advertisement

“You know, we had a case in Long Island where MS-13, one of the other really bad gangs, killed two young girls, 16 years old, walking to school...” Trump said at another point, referring to a murder case in Brentwood, New York. “They knifed them, and they cut them into little pieces, and it was so painful. Perfect, perfect, young, beautiful girls were cut up into little pieces by knives and MS-13... And you know who took care of it for us? ICE. ICE. They had no problem. Kamala wants to defund ICE. We’re not defunding ICE, right? We’re not defunding ICE.”

Trump’s single-minded focus on nativism and anti-immigrant bigotry has defined what experts say is a fascistic 2024 presidential campaign. Echoing Adolf Hitler’s rhetoric, Trump and his campaign have accused immigrants of “poisoning the blood” of the nation through “bad genes” and infectious disease.

He has lied that undocumented immigrants commit more violent crime than U.S.-born and naturalized citizens, when the opposite is true. He has said immigrants have turned the United States into “a garbage can for the world.” Flanked by mugshots at a Colorado rally earlier this month, Trump said Democrats had “imported an army of illegal alien gang members and migrant criminals from the dungeons of the third world” to “prey upon innocent American citizens.” He promised, “We will not be conquered.”

Trump and Republicans across the country have also accused Democrats of “importing” immigrants to illegally vote for them — a reference to the white nationalist “Great Replacement” theory — and used the minuscule prospect of voting by noncitizens as grounds for attempting to purge thousands of U.S. citizens from voter rolls and potentially denying a Trump loss.

Trump’s answer to his migrant problem is a historic mass deportation program, carried out by an unprecedented wave of military personnel and law enforcement, complete with enormous prison camps and a constant churn of expulsions — all part of what key Trump adviser Stephen Miller has said will be “greater than any national infrastructure project” in American history.

Advertisement

Trump has also aimed his ire at U.S. citizens themselves, promising to end the constitutional right of automatic, “birthright” citizenship for people born in the United States if their parents are undocumented. He has also called for “remigration,” a term popularized by European neo-Nazis and right-wing nationalists to refer to the expulsion of even legal immigrants and nativized citizens who are not white — or properly “assimilated.”

Mass deportation would only be one part of what experts worry would be an authoritarian turn under Trump. He has also pledged to erase the independence of the federal civil service, allowing widespread firings by political appointees without recourse.

Trump’s longest-serving former chief of staff described Trump as a fascist, as did the former chairman of the joint chief of staff. Former administration officials have said Trump’s “admiration for dictators like Hitler is rooted in his desire for absolute, unchecked power.” He has threatened to prosecute or punish his perceived enemies over 100 times. He has repeatedly praised his supporters who attacked Congress on Jan. 6, 2021 — while referring to his opponents as an “enemy from within” who would cause chaos on Election Day, which he’s said could be “easily handled” by the military.

Last year, Trump, who has said he’ll be a dictator on “day one,” pledged to “root out the Communists, Marxists, Fascists, and Radical Left Thugs that live like vermin within the confines of our Country.” He recently contrasted the authoritarian Chinese President Xi Jinping: “He controls 1.4 billion people with an iron fist, he’s a brilliant guy, whether you like it or not” — with “evil people in our country.”

Even before he took the stage Sunday, different speakers delivered deeply racist and alarming remarks. Right-wing comedian Tony Hinchcliffe said Latinos “love making babies,” adding: “There’s no pulling out. They don’t do that. They come inside just like they did to our country.” Hinchcliffe also called Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage in the middle of the ocean” before making a remark about Black people who “carved watermelons” instead of pumpkins for Halloween.

Advertisement

Grant Cardone, a real estate investor who founded the 10x Growth Conference, made a racist remark when talking about Trump’s Democratic opponent, Harris. “Her and her pimp handlers will destroy our country,” Cardone said.

David Rem, a childhood friend of Trump’s, called Harris the “anti-Christ.”

And Tucker Carlson, the former Fox News host, went after Harris’ mixed-race heritage. “It’s going to be pretty hard to look at us and say, ‘You know what, Kamala Harris, she got 85 million votes because she’s just so impressive as the first Samoan, Malaysian, low IQ former California prosecutor ever to be elected president,’” he said. Harris’ father is from Jamaica and her mother is from India.

The crowd responds with a Hitler salute as uniformed members of a German-American Bund color guard march at a gathering in New York's Madison Square Garden on Feb. 20, 1939. via Associated Press

Trump’s appearance at Madison Square Garden comes 85 years after another right-wing rally at an earlier iteration of the arena that bore some unnerving resemblances to Sunday’s MAGA rally. In 1939, some 20,000 people walked past counter-demonstrators, under police protection, inside the venue where giant American flags festooned the stage and speakers attacked the press and promised to take the country “back” from various groups. The audience then didn’t wear red hats, but many wore brown uniforms almost identical to those of Nazi storm troopers. Occasionally the entire crowd lifted up their right arms to give the fascist roman salute. The “Pro-America Rally,” organized by the German American Bund, was also a celebration of a man we now know Trump admires: Adolf Hitler.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

NEW YORK (AP) — Donald Trump hosted a rally featuring crude and racist insults at New York’s Madison Square Garden, turning what his campaign had dubbed as the event where he would deliver his closing message into an illustration of what turns off his critics.

With just over a week before Election Day, speakers at the rally Sunday night labeled Puerto Rico a “floating island of garbage,” called Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris “the devil,” and said the woman vying to become the first woman and Black woman president had begun her career as a prostitute.

Advertisement

“I don’t know if you guys know this, but there’s literally a floating island of garbage in the middle of the ocean right now. I think it’s called Puerto Rico,” said Tony Hinchcliffe, a stand-up comic whose set also included lewd and racist comments about Latinos, Jews and Black people, all key constituencies in the election just nine days away.

His joke was immediately criticized by Harris’ campaign as it competes with Trump to win over Puerto Rican communities in Pennsylvania and other swing states. Puerto Rican music superstar Bad Bunny backed Harris shortly after Hinchcliffe’s appearance.

The normally pugnacious Trump campaign took the rare step of distancing itself from Hinchcliffe. “This joke does not reflect the views of President Trump or the campaign,” senior adviser Danielle Alvarez said in a statement.

But other speakers also made incendiary comments. Trump’s childhood friend David Rem referred to Harris as “the Antichrist” and “the devil.” Businessman Grant Cardone told the crowd that Harris ”and her pimp handlers will destroy our country.”

Advertisement

The marquee event reflected the former president’s tone throughout his third White House campaign. Though he refrained from doing so Sunday, Trump often tears into Harris in offensive and personal terms himself, questioning in recent weeks her mental stability and her intelligence as well as calling her “lazy,” long a racist trope used against Black people.

The event was a surreal spectacle that included former professional wrestler Hulk Hogan, TV psychologist Dr. Phil McGraw, former Fox News host Tucker Carlson, politicians including House Speaker Mike Johnson and Reps. Byron Donalds and Elise Stefanik, and an artist who painted a picture of Trump hugging the Empire State Building.

And that was all before Trump was to take the stage, running more than two hours late.

After being introduced by his wife, Melania Trump, in a rare public appearance, the former president began by asking the same questions he’s asked at the start of every recent rally: “Are you better off now than you were four years ago?” The crowd responded with a resounding “No!”

“This election is a choice between whether we’ll have four more years of gross incompetence and failure, or whether we’ll begin the greatest years in the history of our country,” he said.

Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump speaks at a campaign rally at Madison Square Garden, Sunday, Oct. 27, 2024, in New York. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon) Alex Brandon via AP

Advertisement

Trump announced a new tax credit for caregivers

Trump on Sunday added a new proposal to his list of tax cuts aimed at winning over older adults and blue-collar workers, which already includes vows to end taxes on Social Security benefits, tips and overtime pay: A tax credit for family caregivers.

This comes after Harris has talked about the “sandwich generation” of adults caring for aging parents while raising their children at the same time. Harris has proposed federal funding to cover home care costs for older Americans.

Trump otherwise repeated familiar lines about foreign policy and immigration, calling for the death penalty for any migrant who kills a U.S. citizen and saying that the day he takes office, “The migrant invasion of our country ends.”

As Trump’s remarks came up on an hour, some of the crowd began trickling out.

Tech mogul Elon Musk, who spoke earlier and introduced Melania Trump, was a prominent part of Trump’s closing campaign message. The former president called Musk “a genius” and “special.”

Musk nodded to Trump’s recent plan to allow him to lead a government efficiency commission to audit the entire federal government. Several of Musk’s businesses, including Tesla and SpaceX, have major government contracts or have relied on U.S. subsidies, and Musk has faced criticism after reports that he has spoken privately with Russian President Vladimir Putin.

Advertisement

“Your money is being wasted and the department of government efficiency is going to fix that,” Musk said before taking a place offstage beside Melania Trump.

Many of the speakers Sunday appeared on stage at the Republican National Convention. This time, the same speakers shouted and railed more against Democrats.

Hogan, returning to the venue where he performed years ago as a professional wrestler, seemed to reprise his character, emerging wearing a giant red, orange and yellow boa and violently waving a large American flag as he posed and danced. He spat on the stage during his speech, flexed his muscles repeatedly and told the audience: “Trump is the only man that can fix this country today.”

Attendees cheer at a campaign rally for Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump at Madison Square Garden, Sunday, Oct. 27, 2024, in New York. (AP Photo/Julia Demaree Nikhinson) Julia Demaree Nikhinson via AP

Trump allies went after Democrats for bringing up a pro-Nazi rally

Some Democrats, calling Trump a fascist, have compared his Sunday event to a pro-Nazi rally at the Garden in February 1939. Several speakers on Sunday ripped Hillary Clinton, the Democrat defeated by Trump eight years ago, for saying recently that Trump would be “reenacting” the 1939 event. One of them, radio host Sid Rosenberg, directed a profanity at Clinton.

Advertisement

“Hey guys, they’re now scrambling and trying to call us Nazis and fascists,” said Alina Habba, one of Trump’s attorneys, who draped a sparkly “MAGA” jacket over the lectern as she spoke. “And you know what they’re claiming, guys? It’s very scary. They’re claiming we’re going to go after them and try and put them in jail. Well, ain’t that rich?”

Declared Hogan in his raspy growl: “I don’t see no stinkin’ Nazis in here.”

Trump has denounced the four criminal indictments brought against him as politically motivated. He has ramped up his denunciations in recent weeks of “enemies from within,” naming domestic political rivals, and suggested he would use the military to go after them. Harris, in turn, has referred to Trump as a fascist.

The arena was full hours before Trump was scheduled to speak. Outside the arena, the sidewalks were overflowing with Trump supporters in red “Make America Great Again” hats. There was a heavy security presence. Streets were blocked off and access to Penn Station was restricted.

“It just goes to show ya that he has a bigger following of any man that has ever lived,” said Philip D’Agostino, a longtime Trump backer from Queens, the borough where Trump grew up.

Elon Musk speaks before Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump at a campaign rally at Madison Square Garden, Sunday, Oct. 27, 2024, in New York. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci) Evan Vucci via AP

Advertisement

A New Yorker returns home

Trump has a complicated history with the place where he built his business empire and that made him a tabloid and reality TV star. Its residents indicted him last year on 34 felony counts of falsifying business records. He was found guilty in that case, and also found liable in civil court for business fraud and sexual abuse.

But Trump has been talking about wanting to hold a rally at the venue dubbed “The World’s Most Famous Arena” since he launched his campaign.

The rally was one of a number of detours Trump has made from battleground states, including a recent rally in Coachella, California, and rallies on the Jersey Shore and in the South Bronx.

While some have dismissed the stops as nothing more than vanity events aimed at boosting Trump’s ego, the rallies guaranteed Trump national coverage that could help him reach the country’s few remaining undecided voters, many of whom don’t get their news from traditional outlets.

New York has not voted for a Republican for president in 40 years. But that hasn’t stopped Trump from continuing to insist he believes he can win. New York is also home to a handful of competitive congressional races that could determine which party controls the House next year.

Advertisement

Trump routinely uses his hometown as a foil before audiences in other states, painting a dark vision of the city that bears little resemblance to reality. He’s cast it as crime-ridden and overrun by violent, immigrant gangs who have taken over Fifth and Madison avenues and occupied Times Square.

On Sunday, however, Trump was much more complimentary of the city. He said “no city embodies the spirit” and energy of the American people more and talked about attending basketball and hockey games at the Garden.

After Trump concluded his speech after over an hour, opera singer Christopher Macchio came on stage to perform the song “New York, New York.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

NEW YORK — Most of the speakers at former President Donald Trump’s Madison Square Garden rally on Sunday trained their fire on Vice President Kamala Harris and the various national issues they see as her weak points.

But among the handful of colorful New York City-area speakers, there was a strong undercurrent of outer-borough reactionary rage about the city’s decline — due to an uptick in crime, or some vaguer grievance that could easily be interpreted as nostalgia for a time when the city’s political elite looked and sounded a bit more like the angry voices on talk radio shows.

Advertisement

These are the kind of people Trump rubbed elbows with during his tabloid heyday in the 1980s, when he was funding full-page newspaper ads calling to reinstate the death penalty while the Central Park Five, a group of young Black and Latino men accused of a brutal rape, was being wrongfully imprisoned. They were since exonerated.

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani used his speech on Sunday to wax nostalgic about the reduction in crime and the quantity of New York Yankees' wins on his watch. He also went on a racist rant about Palestinians. Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

When Trump uses his remarks at the Al Smith charity dinner to call progressive former Mayor Bill de Blasio a “terrible mayor” — “That’s not comedy, by the way. That’s fact” — it’s to the city’s aging, right-most quintile of residents, and their friends in the crime-spooked suburbs, that he speaks.

It’s of a piece with Trump’s scathing assessments of Detroit and Milwaukee, though, unlike those cities, New York is not located in a swing state, so Sunday’s affair felt more like an airing of grievances for their own sake.

Advertisement

Leading the pack, sure enough, was Sid Rosenberg, conservative host of 77 WABC’s morning drive-time show “Sid and Friends.”

“Look at my city: Yes, this building is beautiful. You’re all beautiful. Look at you!” he declared in his raspy voice. “But you can’t walk outside past about 10 o’clock at night here if you’re a pretty woman like my beautiful wife, Danielle, out there somewhere. You get punched across the face just for walking down the street!”

“I’ll tell you, this is not the New York I grew up in.” - Steve Witkoff, real-estate investor

“Who did that? Bill de Blasio, Eric Adams — shitty Democrat mayors. Andrew Cuomo, Kathy Hochul — shitty Democrat governors,” he continued. “You got homeless and veterans — Americans, Americans — sleeping in their own feces on a bench in Central Park, but the fuckin’ illegals get whatever they want!”

Steve Witkoff, a real-estate investor, was more cryptic in his remarks panning the state of the city in which he was speaking.

Advertisement

“This city shaped who I am, helped me build my business, and gave me my roots. But I’ll tell you, this is not the New York I grew up in,” Witkoff said. “Our city has drifted away from what it once was, but if there is one man who can restore it to its greatness, it is my dear friend, President Donald J. Trump.”

Melania Trump, the former first lady, suggested that New York City residents were leaving because of crime, when evidence suggests the biggest factor for those who decamp is the high cost of housing.

“Crime is on the rise while public safety diminishes, creating an environment where families with young children choose to relocate,” she said. “And this story repeats itself from coast to coast across our nation.”

And of course, Rudy Giuliani, the former New York City mayor turned disgraced Trump aide, received a hero’s welcome when he was introduced to the crowd as “America’s mayor” — a moniker he earned following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that has not been in wide use for the better part of a decade now.

“As the mayor, you know that I reduced crime more than any mayor in history,” Giuliani boasted, prompting loud applause from the crowd. “I improved the quality of life in the five boroughs. I lowered taxes. It was the biggest tax reduction in New York history — not like Donald Trump’s tax reduction, not as big. You know why it was the biggest? It was the only one” in city history.

Advertisement

Giuliani’s nostalgia for his two terms as mayor extended to the New York Yankees’ victories in four Major League Baseball world championships, which he jokingly took credit for, and used as a jumping-off point to ding his successors. In the World Series currently underway, the Yankees trail the Los Angeles Dodgers two games to none.

“You think they need my help now? What the heck does Adams know about baseball? And de Blasio’s so stupid, he doesn’t know about anything,” Giuliani said.

New York City is no longer safe for women to walk around in at night, according to right-wing radio host Sid Rosenberg. Given the number of women walking around midtown Manhattan after the rally, this claim strained credulity. ANGELA WEISS/Getty Images

Giuliani’s remarks were a hit with Phillip Kraese, a union steamfitter from Huntington, New York, and his friend Kristin Uvaydov, a registered nurse from Massapequa — both towns on Long Island. Kraese said he notices a greater number of unhoused people and panhandlers than he used to when he arrives at Penn Station for early morning construction jobs.

“It’s gotten so much worse and that’s why the whole crowd went really crazy when Rudy Giuliani came out,” Uvaydov said.

Advertisement

“He cleaned up the city,” Kraese interjected, prompting Uvaydov to repeat the assessment verbatim.

Another feature of reactionary New York City political thought evident at the rally was a Sept. 11-focused brand of Islamophobia.

Howard Lutnick, co-chair of Trump’s transition team, was president of the investment bank Cantor Fitzgerald when the firm, located on the top floors of the World Trade Center, lost over 600 of its employees on Sept. 11, 2001.

“So, the first thing, we must elect Donald J. Trump president, because we must crush jihad!” Lutnick bellowed after recounting the horror his firm endured 23 years ago.

Giuliani, a staunch Israel hawk, also took the opportunity in his remarks on Sunday to characterize Palestinians in racist terms.

“The Palestinians are taught to kill us at 2 years old.” - Rudy Giuliani

Advertisement

“The Palestinians are taught to kill us at 2 years old. They don’t want a Palestinian in Jordan. They don’t want a Palestinian in Egypt. And Harris wants to bring them to you,” Giuliani claimed. “They may have good people. I’m sorry ― I don’t take a risk with people that are taught to kill Americans at 2.”

“I’m on the side of Israel,” he continued. “Donald Trump’s on the side of Israel, and they’re on the side of the terrorists.”

In fact, Harris has promised to continue granting Israel military aid without additional conditions — a stance that has cost her the support of Arab American activists and elected officials — and does not have a plan to expand the number of Palestinians eligible to immigrate to the United States.

The reality of crime in New York City is similarly more complicated than the picture painted by the speakers at the Madison Square Garden rally.

Like other metropolises across the country, New York City experienced a major uptick in violent crime in late 2020 and 2021. But the city’s homicides, shootings, burglaries, transit crimes, and many other offenses have dropped considerably in the past two years. And even prior to the current decline, the recent rise in crime never so much as approached their peak levels in the early 1990s, when the city first elected Giuliani.

Advertisement

That doesn’t mean that quality-of-life issues have returned to their pre-pandemic levels — or that lingering perceptions about crime, amplified by right-wing media, have not made it a politically potent issue, particularly in the city’s suburbs. Concerns about public safety — and the associated question of state-level criminal justice reforms — played a role in Republicans’ takeover of four Democrat-held House seats in 2022.

For his part, Trump has long pointed to urban crime rates as a reason to vote for him, especially for the people of color often most affected by crime in their neighborhoods. “New York has gone to hell. Vote Trump!” he posted on social media in October 2020.

But while Trump continued to demagogue about crime nationally on Sunday, falsely claiming that ABC News’ David Muir had lied about FBI statistics showing a drop in crime, he actually used a gentler touch than many of the speakers who preceded him when discussing New York City’s specific challenges.

“No city embodies the spirit, energy, potential of the American people more than where we are gathered tonight. We want to win our country, but we also want to win New York and make it safe and strong and beautiful and important and vibrant again,” he said. “And we’re going to do that, and we’ll work with the mayor, and we’ll work with the governor.”

Correction: A previous version of this article misidentified some details of the crime for which the Central Park Five was arrested. It involved the brutal rape of a jogger in Central Park.
The GOP’s ‘survival instinct’ acts as an ally for Trump on Election Day and beyond

toggle caption Win McNamee/Getty Images

Former President Donald Trump’s campaign for reinstatement has taken some unusual flak in recent days. One of his former chiefs of staff, retired Marine Gen. John Kelly, said the man he once served in the Oval Office fit the definition of a fascist, adding Trump spoke admiringly of the Nazi generals who had obeyed orders from the Nazi dictator Adolph Hitler.

Any such description from a credible source would have been fatal for many a presidential campaign in the past. The same could be said of testimony from others that Trump in office had little respect for the Constitution or regard for the rule of law.

Sponsor Message

These attacks follow upon a highly public salvo from the uber-Republican Cheney family: former Vice President Dick Cheney and his daughter Liz, who was co-chair of the House Select Committee to Investigate the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol. Both Cheneys had withheld their support for Trump during the primary season earlier this year, but this fall came out to endorse Harris.

toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

They also extend the denunciations heard from a category of anti-Trump conservatives in the media known as “never Trumpers.” The group has included such illustrious figures on the right as William Kristol and George Will. Online publications such as “The Bulwark” have been sounding alarms from the right about Trump’s autocratic tendencies for nearly a decade.

In recent days, Trump himself has garnished the mix with salacious soliloquies on golf great Arnold Palmer’s anatomy and labels for Democratic Vice President Harris that use a four-letter expletive for excrement. He says her time in office has seen America become “the garbage can of the world.”

All this follows a months-long litany of statements and outbursts from Trump that indicated sympathy for Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and affinity for autocratic figures elsewhere in global politics such as Hungarian strongman Viktor Orban.

Yet as Nov. 5 nears, none of the stories that might have torpedoed another politician’s prospects has had that kind of effect, or even made a detectable difference in the polls or the tenor of Trump’s campaign.

All that stands as evidence that Trump’s base of voters has largely tuned out negative stories about him, which is easily done by watching only Trump-friendly cable news, websites or social media. For those who are still exposed, such stories can be dismissed as “fake news,” a phrase Trump adopted in 2016 that has since proven popular among autocratic politicians around the world.



Beyond the hardcore base, the politics of addition

But Trump’s seemingly unfazed pursuit of this style also demonstrates something else about our present political moment. Trump has his fanatical base, to be sure, but he has more than that. If he did not have more, he would not have won in 2016 or attracted in 2020 the most votes ever cast for an incumbent president, even though he lost that contest.

Trump’s most loyal fans are often described as being ready to “crawl over broken glass” to vote for him, and these legions of such enthusiasts surely exist. But to win he needs more. All the polling shows the race too close to call in the national popular vote and in at least seven swing states.

So Trump needs voters who may have misgivings about him or some of his behavior but who have deep loyalty to the Republican Party or deep aversion to the Democrats.

toggle caption Joseph Prezioso/AFP via Getty Images

Most notably, he needs mainstream Republicans who may well have preferred another nominee in 2016 or 2024 but who will abide another term for Trump rather than risk having a Democrat in the White House for the next four years.

Sponsor Message

This week, the popular Republican governor of New Hampshire, Chris Sununu, brushed off the Hitler remarks without questioning their authenticity. Sununu, who in the past has called Trump “crazy,” was asked on CNN if the Hitler talk prompted a reconsideration of the governor’s endorsement.

“No,” Sununu said. “We’ve heard a lot of extreme things from Donald Trump. With a guy like that it’s kind of baked into the vote.”

Days earlier, on ABC News, Sununu had dismissed the outrage over Trump threatening to use the military against the “enemy within” in the U.S. He called such reactions “hyperbole.”

And, Sununu said, he would be voting for Trump because he could not face four more years of a Democratic agenda.



Some defections, but do they prove the rule?

It must be said that in recent days there have been Republican officials who have spoken out against their party’s fealty to Trump.

After the Hitler remarks, for example, the most senior Republican in the Wisconsin state Senate announced he would not vote for Trump. In the same week, Shawn Reilly, the independent mayor of that state’s largest Republican city, said he would be voting for Harris.

Lifelong Republican David Holt, the mayor of Oklahoma City, wrote in a Philadelphia newspaper this week that he could not vote for Trump. Holt wrote that prior to 2016 he “took for granted that both [parties’] leading candidates respected the rule of law and deeply understood the concept that no president is above the law.”

toggle caption Scott Olson/Getty Images

The Harris campaign has compiled lists of hundreds of Republicans in public positions who have endorsed the Democrat. But as a rule, notable Republicans with recognizable names have stayed in the fold. The scenario first seen when Trump emerged from the candidate pack in 2015 is replayed again and again.

Sponsor Message

It goes like this: Trump says something headline-grabbing about Muslims or immigrants or the POW ordeal of Sen. John McCain. The statement prompts intraparty denunciations. But after a few days or weeks, Trump is still on top, unrepentant, unbent and unbowed — and so dominant in the media coverage as to marginalize his opposition.

After the infamous “Access Hollywood” tape aired in October 2016, such prominent Republicans as former House Speaker Paul Ryan declined to campaign with him. It did not seem to matter, even in Ryan’s home state of Wisconsin.

The controversies have erupted, reached a moment of apparent crisis and subsided. And the hardcore Trump support has often seemed to grow all the harder.

Respecting and obeying that hardcore has generally been the safe position for Republicans in statewide office or seats in Congress. They may not need to be front-line Trump defenders, but they cannot assume they will escape retribution if they openly support an opponent — especially a Democrat.

toggle caption Mark Wilson/Getty Images

After the attack on the Capitol in 2021, Speaker of the House Kevin McCarthy said Trump bore responsibility for the riot. Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said Trump “summoned the mob and incited the mob.” Yet, within days, both Republicans were backing down. McCarthy was going hat in hand to Mar-a-Lago for a photo opportunity, and McConnell was unwilling to support Trump’s impeachment for his role in the Jan. 6 events.

It was apparent in each of these situations that whatever reaction might appear in some newspapers or on certain TV channels, the popular underpinnings of the Trump phenomenon remained solid. The soundings taken by Republican leaders confirmed this and guided their actions thereafter.

This has proven true even during the years after Trump was out of office and his return to power far from presumed. Even then, desertion to support a rival such as Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis in the primaries has cost former Trump allies their momentum, at a minimum, and cost some their party support.



Sponsor Message

The minority mindset and survival instinct

Is all this new? Not really. To some degree, the endgame in any presidential cycle consists of the two parties telling their loyalists to turn out and cast one for the team, largely to keep the other side from winning. In some cycles, that’s an easier sell than others. Democrats in particular have been resistant to the idea of turning out just because it was Election Day and voting “D” because they were supposed to.

It has long been said that in choosing their presidential candidates: Democrats want to fall in love while Republicans want to fall in line. Once a GOP has a front-runner, most Republicans recognize the power of pulling together to put that candidate over the top.

Republicans, at least in recent generations, have been more inclined to vote and to stick with the party when they do. That expresses loyalty, to be sure, but it also comes from what might be called a survival instinct. Republicans felt like the minority party for roughly half a century after Franklin Roosevelt swept into office and installed the New Deal in an era of Democratic dominance in other elections as well.

Republicans even felt like the minority party when their post-World War II candidates started winning the White House and winning second terms with bigger margins than their first. President Dwight Eisenhower did that, and so did successors Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush.

There have been plenty of voters in both parties who had to swallow hard before pulling the lever for their party’s man — or woman — in the past. References to holding one’s nose in the polling booth led some to refer to the “clothespin vote,” a regular feature of two-party politics where only the two major party nominees have any chance of being elected.

Sponsor Message

In the late 1990s, Republicans and not a few other observers were amazed that President Bill Clinton maintained his high voter approval ratings even in the depths of his impeachment over an affair with a White House intern. Even after the most damning evidence had been presented in public, Clinton’s approval rating in the Gallup Poll stayed above 60%. In December 1998, the month he was impeached, Clinton’s approval hit 73%.

Still, Trump has taken this dynamic to unprecedented levels. His rise to the presidency was not built on previous political experience or public service but on a media presence in a “reality show” based on his tough businessman persona. He has made a specialty of maintaining a connection with an audience through showmanship and media dominance that other candidates cannot match.

And given its unprecedented origins and sustainability, that connection seems all but certain to live on — whatever happens on Nov. 5.
These swing-state counties are key to understanding the presidential race

In the 2020 presidential election, the country was stretched ideologically and demographically. From 2012 to 2016, more than 200 counties flipped from former President Barack Obama to former President Donald Trump. In 2020, less than half that number changed hands from Trump to President Biden.

Biden won by bigger margins in cities, and Trump drove up turnout and margins in rural areas. Biden was able to win because of his strength in the suburbs and the shift of white voters with college degrees toward the Democratic Party in the Trump era — something Vice President Harris wants to try to replicate.

But there’s no guarantee that will happen again, especially as Trump has made efforts to peel off portions of traditionally Democratic groups, like young men, young Black men and working-class Latinos.

Below is a guide to the counties to keep an eye on in each of the seven swing states as returns roll in on election night and in the days afterward. These counties will help explain why the next president won. (Source for county vote data comes from the U.S. Election Atlas .)

Jump to a state: Pennsylvania | Wisconsin | Michigan | North Carolina | Georgia | Arizona | Nevada

Pennsylvania

19 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+1.18 (82,166 votes)

1. Montgomery: The most populous Philadelphia suburban county, Biden netted 40,000 more votes there in 2020 than Hillary Clinton did in 2016. Harris has to try to match that in order to win this important state. Biden saw a 120,000-vote shift statewide in his favor — 105,000 of that came from just the four suburban Philadelphia counties (Montgomery, Bucks, Delaware and Chester), which are among the highest educated, wealthiest and most populated counties in the state. Though they voted overwhelmingly for Biden in 2020, Trump can’t ignore them because he’s expected to get a significant share of votes from them, too. Harris would also like to do at least as well as Biden did in Philadelphia proper, where Democrats have seen a slight decline in their vote share since Obama was on the ballot (85% in 2012, 82% in 2016 and 81% in 2020).

Sponsor Message

2. Allegheny (and surrounding area): Biden won this county, where Pittsburgh is, in 2020. He netted nearly 40,000 more votes out of Allegheny than Clinton did four years earlier. Harris will need to try to replicate Biden’s performance because in all the counties that touch Allegheny, including Butler where Trump was shot, Trump won handily.

3. Cumberland: Trump won this central Pennsylvania county with 55%. It’s a mix of suburban and rural and sits just across the river from the state capital of Harrisburg. Biden was able to cut into Trump’s margins, netting 7,000 more votes than Clinton pulled from Trump in 2016. Biden’s 44% in the county in 2020 was the best for a Democrat since 1964. Cumberland has seen a 15% population increase since 2010, has the highest median income outside the Philadelphia collar counties and the seventh-highest college attainment of any county in the state. It’s the county with the highest level of college attainment that went Republican.

4. Lackawanna: It’s home to Scranton in the northeastern part of the state. Biden was born there and won it by more than Clinton in 2016. But it has been trending away from Democrats in the age of Trump due, in part, to its high blue-collar population.

Sponsor Message

5. Cambria: This populated, more rural county in the central western part of the state could give some clues about similar places that are crucial to Trump’s support and turnout level with his base. It’s 90% white and below the national average for college attainment and income. Like other more rural counties, it went by more for Trump in 2020 than 2016, despite him losing the state overall.

Boomerang counties*: Erie, Northampton

* Boomerang counties refer to places that went for Obama twice, Trump in 2016 and Biden in 2020.

Wisconsin

10 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+0.63 (20,682 votes)

1. Dane (Madison): This heavily Democratic county, home to Madison and the University of Wisconsin, has seen tremendous growth in the past decade. It accounted for 1 in 6 Democratic votes statewide in 2020, but 80% of the total vote-shift in Biden's favor.

2. Milwaukee: For Harris to repeat a Democratic win in the state, she’s going to have to drive up turnout in this county. It is the most populous county in the state, is 27% Black, 17% Latino and 5% Asian American. It’s also a critical place for Trump. Milwaukee County gave Trump his second highest vote total of any county outside Waukesha in the Milwaukee suburbs.

3. Waukesha: There are 72 counties in Wisconsin, and nearly 10% of all the votes cast for Trump in 2020 came from this one suburban county just west of Milwaukee. A lot is made of the fact that Trump’s margins of victory were significantly smaller in the “WOW” counties (Waukesha, Ozaukee and Washington) surrounding Milwaukee in 2020. That was largely the result of far fewer third-party votes pulling from Democrats that year. Trump got nearly the identical percentages in each of the three WOW counties in both 2016 and 2020. The four suburban counties that touch Milwaukee — the WOW counties plus Racine — accounted for 1 in 5 Trump votes statewide. Harris probably has to do at least as well as Biden in these suburbs to win the state.

Sponsor Message

4. La Crosse: Clinton got a bare majority in this western Wisconsin county, but Biden expanded the margin here. It could be a sign of how the state goes and how Harris performs with blue-collar white voters — it’s nearly 90% white — and with younger voters. The city of La Crosse within the county is home to three colleges and thousands of students.

5. Brown (Green Bay): Welcome to Packers Country. In fairness, the entire state is Packers Country, but Brown County is home to Green Bay. This county leans Republican, but Biden cut the margins here — again, mostly because of fewer people voting third party in 2020. Harris can’t afford to get blown out here or in neighboring Outagamie. It also has one of the higher Latino populations in the state.

Boomerang: Door, Sauk

Michigan

15 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+2.78 (154,181 votes)

1. Wayne (Detroit, Dearborn): Michigan shifted in Biden’s favor by more than 164,000 votes. A quarter of that was because of this urban county, home to Detroit and Dearborn. It will tell the story of whether Harris was able to turn out Black voters (its population is 38% Black) and how much the war in Gaza hurts Harris. Wayne is home to 100,000 Arab Americans, the largest population of Arab Americans anywhere in the country.

2. Oakland: This once-reliably Republican suburban Detroit county accounted for Biden’s largest vote shift in 2020. It’s one of the state’s wealthiest, most educated and most populous counties in the state. It also has significant Black and AAPI populations that Harris needs to turn out for her to match Biden’s success. The car industry has long roots here —Stellantis, formerly Chrysler, is headquartered here — but the health care industry is one of the county’s biggest employers and it has also seen a tech boom that has attracted younger and more diverse people.

Sponsor Message

3. Macomb: This Detroit suburb is slightly more conservative than its neighbor Oakland, and it gave Trump more votes than any other county in the state in both 2016 and 2020. But Biden was able to slice into Trump’s margin there. It’s the kind of place Trump needs to run up the score and where Harris needs to keep it close.

4. Washtenaw (Ann Arbor): Staying in the Detroit metro area, no other county gave Biden a wider margin of victory than this one. In fact, no Democrat, including Obama in 2008, won this county with a higher percentage of the vote. Home to the University of Michigan, it’s the most educated county in the state and could indicate Harris’ level of support with younger voters.

5. Kent (Grand Rapids): This county in the western part of the state could signal which direction Michigan goes. It was once a Republican stronghold, but its growth and the ideological shifts within the parties has moved it more Democratic. It was one of only three counties statewide to go from Trump in 2016 to Biden in 2020.

Boomerang: Saginaw. (Leelanau and Kent also flipped from Trump to Biden.)

toggle caption Brandon Bell/Getty Images

North Carolina

16 electoral votes

2020 margin: R+1.3 (74,483 votes)

1. Wake (Raleigh): It’s the most populous county in the state and one of the fastest-growing in the country . That has meant a huge shift in its politics in favor of Democrats. In 2004, Republican George W. Bush won it with 51%. By 2008, Obama got 57% of the vote. Biden in 2020 won it with 63%. His margin of victory — 167,000 — is 25,000 more than all of the votes Bush got in the county in 2000. Biden saw a 100,000-vote shift in his favor in the state; 60% of it came from this county. Harris has to drive up the score here with young voters and the state’s most educated voters and white-collar professionals in other parts of the Research Triangle, like Durham and Orange, home to a host of big-name universities, like N.C. State, the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Duke and Wake Forest.

Sponsor Message

2. Mecklenburg (Charlotte): Charlotte is one of the fastest-growing cities in the country. The county has seen a 21% population increase since 2010 and that has helped Democrats make this state more competitive. Like in Wake, Biden gained an almost 60,000-vote shift here.

3. Union: Just outside Charlotte, this is the highest-populated county that Trump won in the state in 2020. It’s one of five counties that border Mecklenburg, all won by Trump. Watch the margins here. Biden was able to cut into them, and Harris will need to do the same.

4. Robeson: What insulated Trump in North Carolina largely was his strength with white voters without college degrees. It’s the one state of the seven swing states in 2020 where he saw an increase in his vote margin with non-college white voters. But this county, one of the poorest and most diverse in the state, represents what Trump’s team has been able to do in appealing to rural, nonwhite voters. Robeson is 42% Native American, almost a quarter Black, 12% Latino, and had long voted Democratic. Yet Trump flipped it in 2016, then expanded his margin in 2020, winning with 59% of the vote there. He held one of his final rallies of the 2020 campaign in Robeson, pushing his message of the “forgotten” men and women after declaring his support for federal legislation that would recognize the Lumbee tribe .

5. Henderson: This is one of the more populous Trump-won counties affected by Hurricane Helene in western North Carolina. Trump won a majority of the votes in counties affected by Helene. Turnout there will give some idea how Trump’s vote is affected. Neighboring Buncombe County, home to Asheville, voted heavily Democratic, so Harris’ campaign will be watching turnout closely there, as well.

Boomerang: None. (Nash and New Hanover flipped from Trump to Biden. Scotland went from Biden to Trump.)

Georgia

16 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+0.23 (11,779 votes)

toggle caption Ryan Collerd/AFP via Getty Images

1. Gwinnett: This county, which was long Republican-held, represents the growing — and diverse — suburbs in the Atlanta area (and in the country) that helped Biden win the state for Democrats for the first time since 1992. It has seen a population boom in the past decade, has a higher-than-average median income than the rest of the country, and it is majority nonwhite. Biden won it with 58%, up from 50% in 2020 and 45% for the Obama-Biden ticket in 2012. Does that pace continue? The growth in the Atlanta area is the main reason Democrats have made the state more competitive. Similarly, pay attention to Cobb and Henry.

Sponsor Message

2. Hall: This is one of those populous, heavily Republican metro Atlanta counties Trump won by huge margins in 2020, but he won them by less than he did in 2016. To make up what was such a narrow margin statewide, Trump will look to drive up the score in places like this. Similarly, watch Paulding to the north and west of the city.

3. Clayton: Just south of Atlanta, this will be a good test of Harris’ ability to turn out Black voters. It’s 73% Black, 15% Latino and is the sixth-most populated county in the state.

4. Chatham (Savannah): So much attention is paid to the Atlanta metro area because of its size and growth, but watch the margins in places like Chatham, home to Savannah. It’s among the counties Biden won in 2020 by more than Clinton did in 2016. Some notable others: Muscogee (Columbus), Richmond (Augusta), Bibb (Macon), Baldwin.

5. Columbia: Just outside Augusta, this is one of those Trump-won counties, where Biden shrunk the margins. Others include: Houston (outside Macon), Effingham (outside Savannah), Glynn (Brunswick), Camden, Thomas and Lowndes.

6. Peach: This low-population county in the south central portion of the state won’t shift the state in a significant way by itself, but it will be a test of whether Harris can turn out rural Black voters to offset Trump’s strength with white, non-college voters. It’s 44% Black, went twice for Obama, but then flipped to Trump in 2016 and 2020, when Trump won it by a slightly higher margin.

Boomerang: None. And no counties flipped Trump to Biden, either.

Arizona

11 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+0.31 (10,457 votes)

1. Maricopa (Phoenix): Biden won the state by just over 10,000 votes, with a 100,000-vote swing from 2016 — 90% of that came from Maricopa, home to Phoenix. It was the first time in decades that Democrats had won the county, and it gave Biden 61% of his votes statewide in 2020.

2. Pima (Tucson): Biden ran up the score in this traditionally Democratic county. He netted 40,000 more votes here than Clinton in 2016. Similarly, watch Coconino (Flagstaff) and Apache, where Biden ran up the score in these Democratic-leaning counties.

Sponsor Message

3. Pinal: Trump won by wider margins in Republican-leaning counties like this one than in 2016. But look to see if that trend continues here and also Yavapai, Mohave, Yuma and Cochise.

Boomerang: None. But Maricopa was the big flip here from Trump to Biden.

Nevada

6 electoral votes

2020 margin: D+2.39 (33,596 votes)

1. Clark (Las Vegas): Two-thirds of all the votes in the state come from this county, which is home to Las Vegas. It will tell us whether Trump’s appeals on the economy to working-class Latino voters resonate. It is also home to a significant share of Asian American and Black voters.

2. Washoe (Reno): It has mirrored the statewide vote percentages for both parties in every presidential election since 2004 — and went with the winner each time.

Boomerang: None. Washoe is the key swing county.
With Election Day fast approaching, disinformation efforts are everywhere. A Russian disinformation network pushed false claims of sexual abuse by Kamala Harris’ running mate, Tim Walz, reports Wired. Foreign adversaries’ election interference efforts are “more active now than they ever have been,” says the director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. The U.S. intelligence community “expects foreign influence efforts will intensify in the lead-up to Election Day,” according to a memo issued Monday by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.

We are used to thinking of propaganda and disinformation through one lens: the far right. Stories around this subject have often centered around the alt-right movement that gained popularity in 2016, along with the Russian efforts to bolster Donald Trump’s rise. Indeed, at that time, that was by far the most pressing danger facing America online and beyond.

But in the past eight years, things have changed. Or rather, they have evolved.

What we are dealing with is extensive, all-encompassing and targeted at all of us.

Disinformation and online propaganda are skills that have now been perfected and adopted the world over by fascist and far-right governments. This means that we are no longer dealing just with Russia or the alt-right. What we are dealing with is extensive, all-encompassing and targeted at all of us. We are facing an online propaganda crisis like one we’ve never seen before.

As Russia has grown its influence operations since 2016, the internet has become an influence battlefield. One where pushing global opinions, sowing discord and chaos, and promoting antidemocratic thinking in democracies have become the tactics in a larger strategy among global powers to weaken their enemies, strengthen themselves, and transform the landscape in which future physical battlefields may one day take place.

Far-right movements are inherently oppositional and driven by maximalist ideologies, which means that while they may share certain characteristics — like nationalism, xenophobia and antiglobalism — their goals and strategies often clash. In essence, far-right movements are not a monolith, but a web of conflicting and cooperating entities, each using propaganda to further its own specific agenda while fighting both liberal democracies and rival authoritarian movements.

For example, the far-right movements in the U.S. focus heavily on anti-immigration and Christian nationalism, while Iran’s far right manifests through theocratic authoritarianism and anti-Israel rhetoric. These differences in ideology mean that far-right propaganda in the U.S. is vastly different from the far-right narratives in Iran or Russia, despite their shared opposition to liberal democracy.

Iran, for example, is targeting both the American left and right. U.S. intelligence assessments and researchers say that hackers linked to the country’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps targeted both presidential campaigns. An Iranian influence operation has created fake news sites that appear to be U.S.-based. One site has run op-eds such as “Why Harris’s Stance On Palestine Cost Her My Vote,” which are meant to create more internal division among the left, while another site was meant to appear as a right-wing news outlet based in Georgia and spreading anti-Harris propaganda. By using AI software, they have been able to expand the scope and productivity of their propaganda. Unlike Russia, which often focuses on specific political outcomes, Iran’s primary goal is to foster internal discord and erode trust in U.S. democratic institutions as a whole.

These countries are waging war between each other, and that we are all potential victims.

On the other end of the spectrum is Israel. According to The New York Times and Haaretz, the Israeli Ministry for Diaspora Affairs paid for an influence campaign aimed at lawmakers as well as young progressives in order to increase support for its war in Gaza. The campaign created sites to spread Islamophobia by focusing on the role of Muslims in slave trade in East Africa and increase discord around protests on college campuses by labeling some campuses as “safe” or “unsafe.”

More broadly, Israel’s information warfare has aligned with other far-right movements spreading propaganda that aligns with their position. Poland’s far right publication Visegrad 24 has spent the entirety of the Gaza war promoting Israel’s position, including collaborations with some of the most outspoken pro-Israel influencers. Visegrad 24, which has some connections to the Polish government, also exists as an anti-Russian propaganda outlet.

Similar operations by other countries and movements have been uncovered, from China to Venezuela to North Korea. In essence, what this means is that these countries are waging war between each other, and that we are all potential victims. When they can convince us to turn against each other or to spread antidemocratic sentiment, we become their digital allies, helping achieve their goals in destroying trust in democracy and increasing their global power. One only needs to see how some white nationalists have successfully positioned themselves as pro-Palestinian to see how successful these movements can become.

With the news that Russia has used some of America’s biggest far-right influencers to spread propaganda, we can see how extensive and effective these operations have now become among the biggest players. All of this means that we must arm ourselves with digital media literacy as well as constant vigilance about the information we gather online. Being liberal, progressive or centrist does not protect anyone from disinformation anymore. We are all both soldiers and targets on the digital battlefield.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

RIVERDALE, Ga. — When union canvasser Tracey Thornhill walked up to a one-story home on a bright, cloudless day here in a working-class city of 15,000 people south of Atlanta, he found a receptive ear to his pitch about making sure to vote for Kamala Harris over Donald Trump in the November election.

“Trump made a lot of mistakes that his whole camp is just like, it never happened,” a young African American man said through a crack in his screen door, ticking off complaints about the GOP presidential nominee’s first term in office. “I’m not an idiot. I don’t forget things very easily,” he added.

Advertisement

Thornhill — one of 260 members of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) knocking on doors in Georgia this month and urging voters to support Harris — thanked the man, reminded him to have a plan to vote, and then set off for the next house in Clayton County, a predominantly Democratic and majority-Black county that is the fifth most populous in Georgia.

“People are always taking the Black community for granted, but now we’re letting them know we can be taken seriously,” the 59-year-old former truck driver from nearby Hampton remarked as he hit the pavement in a pair of white and black Nike shoes. “I don’t think it’s as close as they say it is,” he added in regard to polls showing an extremely tight race in the state.

Four years ago, Black voters in Georgia helped flip the state blue for the first time in decades, electing Joe Biden president and winning Senate seats in a pair of upset runoff elections that gave Democrats control of the U.S. Senate — a resounding rebuke of Trumpism and his handling of COVID-19. As a result, the party was able to pass a historic list of achievements, including pandemic relief, lower drug pricing reforms, massive investments in green energy and manufacturing, and the appointment of the first Black woman to the U.S. Supreme Court.

AFSCME member Tracey Thornhill speaks to a voter near Atlanta. Igor Bobic / HuffPost

Advertisement

Two years later, one of those senators — Raphael Warnock — delivered another upset, topping Georgia football legend Herschel Walker.

Now, as anxieties grow about cracks in Democrats’ “blue wall” in the states of Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Michigan, as well as some polls suggesting that Trump is making gains with Latino and Black voters, the Democratic Party is once again pinning its hopes on the Peach State and its growing minority population to come through for the party and turn the page on Trump once and for all.

“In 2021, Georgia literally saved the country. Now we’re fixin’ to do it again,” Warnock said Thursday before a crowd of 23,000 people who showed up to hear from Harris and former President Barack Obama at a raucous rally in Clarkston, another populous suburb east of Atlanta. “This is more than an election. It’s a moral moment in America.”

Democrats are facing a tougher political environment this time, however. Although the economy has rebounded and inflation is subsiding, Americans still rank the cost of living as the top issue, giving the GOP a critical advantage. Trump’s bungled handling of COVID, which gave Biden an edge in 2020, seems to have faded in voters’ minds as he strokes fears about undocumented immigrants, crime and transgender people in the closing days of the race. In Georgia, Trump currently holds a 1.6 percentage point lead, according to the FiveThirtyEight polling average.

Priorities USA, a top Democratic super PAC, is expecting that this year’s election will be as close or closer than the last two presidential elections. In 2020, for example, Biden won Georgia by a mere 12,000 votes. In 2024, Priorities USA’s projections show a state where the margin will be fewer than 1,000 voters — small enough to automatically trigger a recount.

Advertisement

“There are a few persuadable voters left. No matter how you define them, the audience is clear: young voters, voters of color and women. How they break will shape the election,” Priorities USA said in a poll briefing for reporters last week.

Democrats see reproductive rights as a driver for voter turnout in Georgia, which has the most restrictive abortion law on the books — a six-week abortion ban — in any of the battleground states. At a rally in Atlanta earlier this month, Harris emphasized Trump’s role in appointing Supreme Court justices who overturned Roe v. Wade, which had guaranteed the constitutional right to an abortion. She also slammed him for the dismissive way he spoke about the grieving family of a Georgia mother, Amber Thurman, who died after waiting 20 hours for a hospital to treat her complications from an abortion pill.

Former President Barack Obama holds hands with Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris during a campaign rally in Georgia, a battleground state. DREW ANGERER via Getty Images

“Where is the compassion?” Harris asked, reacting to Trump’s comments at a Fox News town hall. “He belittles their sorrow, making it about himself and his television ratings. It is cruel. And listen, I promised Amber’s mother that we will always remember her story and speak her name.”

Getting more young people out to vote is another priority for Democratic organizers in Georgia. The New Georgia Project Action Fund, a nonprofit organization originally affiliated with Stacey Abrams that helped turn the state purple by registering thousands of new voters in marginalized communities, has set a goal to knock on 1 million doors this election. So far, it says it’s hit about 600,000 homes.

Advertisement

Three brothers — Mudrik McWilliams, 20, Nassir McWilliams, 20, and Egypt McWilliams, 19 — are part of that effort. When they aren’t playing music or learning to code, they’re knocking on doors together in Fulton County, Atlanta’s largest county, which Democrats are relying on turning out in large numbers to counter Trump’s strength in the vast swathes of rural Georgia.

“There are tangible differences that we can make in our community with our vote. Obviously, change takes time, but there are things we can do,” Mudrik McWilliams told HuffPost as he canvassed a lower-income neighborhood, talking up abortion rights, the child tax credit, funding for HBCUs and reduced prescription drug costs.

“A lot of these communities that still happen to have a lot of Black people in them, lower-income communities, are more affected by propaganda. They are a lot more likely to just believe, ‘Oh, Trump’s going to get us money,’” he continued.

Mudrik also said he has encountered younger people in the community who are drawn to Trump out of misguided notions of “being a contrarian to the point where they see everyone else saying, ‘Hey, I want to vote for Kamala just because she’s Black or because she’s a woman.’ Like, that’s not the case.”

Canvassing is not always a rewarding job. The brothers, two of whom are twins, often found no one home or had moved to another address since the last election. The risk of getting stung by hornets while walking in the Georgia heat posed additional problems.

Advertisement

Mudrik McWilliams (left) canvassing in Atlanta with his brothers. “There are tangible differences that we can make in our community with our vote," he said. Igor Bobic / HuffPost

Harris has made pleas to young voters in the closing days of the race, whom she leads Trump by a 2-to-1 margin, according to a Harvard Institute of Politics survey conducted this week. At her celebrity-studded rally with Obama outside Atlanta on Thursday, the vice president said young Americans are “rightly impatient for change” and urged them not to give up hope.

“You, who have only known the climate crisis, are leading the charge to protect our planet and our future,” Harris said. “You, young leaders, who grew up with active shooter drills, are fighting to keep our schools safe. You, who know now fewer rights than your mothers and grandmothers, are standing up for reproductive freedom.”

Trump is also making targeted efforts to reach young voters, though particularly men, by appearing on podcasts that skew toward Gen Z and embracing cryptocurrency. His campaign has turned over much of its voter turnout efforts to several outside groups, including right-wing commentator Charlie Kirk’s Turning Point Action and billionaire Elon Musk’s America PAC, rather than having the campaign itself and the Republican National Committee spearhead the effort. It’s a questionable and risky strategy.

On Wednesday, Trump appeared at a huge Turning Point Action-organized rally in Duluth, a battleground suburb north of Atlanta. It featured pyrotechnics and flashy concert lighting, with country music star Jason Aldean warming up the crowd. And a trio of conspiracy-oriented Trump backers — former presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr., former Democratic Rep. Tulsi Gabbard and conservative commentator Tucker Carlson — joined Trump on stage as guests to deliver remarks. Carlson cast him as America’s “dad” and said he would give the country a “vigorous spanking” with a victory over Harris.

Advertisement

“When Dad gets home, you know what he says? You’ve been a bad girl,” Carlson said. “You’ve been a bad little girl and you’re getting a vigorous spanking right now. And no, it’s not going to hurt me more than it hurts you.”

Trump, meanwhile, urged his supporters to vote for him “whichever way you want to do it,” emphasizing his campaign to get Republicans to vote early, something he repeatedly denigrated in prior elections. Georgia has shattered voting records so far, with nearly 2.75 million of its 7.25 million registered voters casting a ballot already. It’s still too early to tell, however, which party is voting in greater numbers and what — if anything — it means for the overall state of the race.

Making his way through a quiet neighborhood street in Riverdale on Friday, Thornhill said he felt confident that Georgia would reject Trump once again and make Harris the country’s first Black woman president.

“It’s so much more at stake now,” he said. “We thought the last election was something because we were going through COVID. This one right here — you talking about a man punishing his enemies and calling in the National Guard — this guy went done flat crazy.”

“We have to do this. We can’t go home,” he added, walking up a driveway to ring another doorbell.

CORRECTION: A previous version of this article misstated the name of the New Georgia Project Action Fund and its founder.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Biden was discussing the importance of character at the event, hosted by the Laborers’ International Union of North America, on Saturday night when he charged that the former president “doesn’t give a damn about union workers — or any workers, for that matter.”

Advertisement

“He views unions as getting in the way of the accumulation of wealth for individuals,” said Biden, who’s called himself the “most pro-union president” in history.

“Folks, it’s a laborer’s interest to defeat Donald Trump more than any other race you’ve been in, as long as any one of you been alive,” he added.

Then he got a little more personal, as Trump often does.

“Donald Trump is a loser,” he said as people in the crowd cheered. “He’s a loser as a candidate, and — more importantly, in my view, and I’m just going to say it, straight up: He’s a loser as a man.”

President Joe Biden photographed speaking at a Laborers' International Union of North America (LiUNA) "Get Out the Vote" kick-off event in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on October 26, 2024. ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS via Getty Images

Advertisement

During a speech in Philadelphia earlier this month, the president mocked Trump, saying he was “scared to death” to agree to another presidential debate with the Democratic nominee, Vice President Kamala Harris.
'Washington Post' columnists push back against non-endorsement decision

toggle caption Andrew Harnik/Getty Images

A growing number of current and former journalists at The Washington Post are criticizing the legacy newspaper after owner Jeff Bezos decided to withhold a planned editorial endorsement for president for the first time in 36 years.

"The Washington Post’s decision not to make an endorsement in the presidential campaign is a terrible mistake," said a joint column that had been signed by 17 Post columnists as of Saturday afternoon.

The opinion piece, published on the paper's website, argued that presidential endorsements serve as a reminder to readers of what the Post stands for. It declared that the paper cannot retreat from the its responsibility to stand up for core democratic values threatened by Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. Its editorials have repeatedly warned that Trump is unfit for office.

"An independent newspaper might someday choose to back away from making presidential endorsements. But this isn’t the right moment, when one candidate is advocating positions that directly threaten freedom of the press and the values of the Constitution," the column added. It was signed by some of the Post's most prominent writers, including Pulitzer Prize winner Eugene Robinson, David Ignatius and Jennifer Rubin.

Sponsor Message

NPR first broke news of Bezos' decision. The column arrived just hours after publisher William Lewis made the announcement Friday afternoon. In his own opinion piece, Lewis explained that the Post did not routinely make endorsements until 1976. He said it was time to return to that tradition and support "readers' ability to make up their own minds."

The Post had drafted an editorial endorsement for Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris earlier this month. But it was ultimately scrapped by the paper's billionaire owner Bezos, also the Amazon founder, the Post reported. The Post's revelation came just days after it was reported that the Los Angeles Times owner Patrick Soon-Shiong blocked the paper's Editorial Board from endorsing Harris.

toggle caption The Washington Post/Screenshot by NPR

Two other columns published on Friday expressed frustration with the Post's decision. "I have never been more disappointed in the newspaper than I am today," wrote editor and columnist Ruth Marcus. "This is not the time to make such a shift. It is the time to speak out, as loudly and convincingly as possible, to make the case that we made in 2016 and again in 2020: that Trump is dangerously unfit to hold the highest office in the land."

Editor and columnist Karen Tumulty wrote, "Editorial boards exist to make judgments and to speak for the institution. If this change in policy regarding presidential endorsements was a stand on some long-ignored principle of our past, why did the newspaper wait until just 11 days before the election to announce it?"

Sponsor Message

In a chilling cartoon, Pulitzer Prize-winning artist Ann Telnaes depicted broad strokes of black paint with the title "Democracy Dies in Darkness."

"I was in the middle of completing the final of another cartoon and texted my editor that I wanted to change my idea," she wrote on Substack. "Grabbing a piece of bristol and a large brush, I painted what I felt."

The Washington Post Guild leadership also said they were deeply troubled by the decision and how management interfered with the work of the Editorial Board. "We are already seeing cancellations from once loyal readers. This decision undercuts the work of our members at a time when we should be building our readers’ trust, not losing it," they wrote in a statement.

Readers on social media said they had canceled their subscriptions to the Post and they came at a fast clip after news of the decision broke. More than 1,600 people canceled digital subscriptions in the first three hours, according to internal exchanges reviewed by NPR.

Post editor-at-large Robert Kagan also announced his resignation on Friday following the non-endorsement. In an interview with CNN, Kagan said the move indicated Bezos' concerning relationship with Trump. "This is clearly an effort by Bezos to try to get on Trump's good side in advance of his presidency," he said.

Bezos holds significant business interests before the federal government that involve billions of dollars each year, from Amazon’s shipping business and cloud computing services to his Blue Origin space company.

When Trump was in office, he threatened to personally review Amazon’s submission to the Pentagon for a cloud computing contract worth $10 billion — out of frustration of the Post's coverage of him. The Defense Department instead awarded the contract to Microsoft, surprising outside industry analysts. It was later divvied up among four companies, including Amazon, after it filed a lawsuit.

Sponsor Message

On Friday, just hours after the Post's announcement to not endorse, The Associated Press reported that Trump met with executives of Bezos’s Blue Origin, which has a multibillion-dollar contract with NASA.

A statement from Post Guild leadership on the Washington Post's decision to not endorse a presidential candidate pic.twitter.com/fYU7hkr79K — Washington Post Guild (@PostGuild) October 25, 2024

Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, who cracked the Watergate scandal, wrote in a joint statement: "We respect the traditional independence of the editorial page, but this decision 11 days out from the 2024 presidential election ignores the Washington Post's own overwhelming reportorial evidence on the threat Donald Trump poses to democracy," CNN's Brian Stelter reported.

Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter and editor David Maraniss — who has been at the paper since 1977 and describes himself as a "Washington Post lifer" — wrote on X: "The decision in this of all years to not endorse when democracy is on the line is contemptible."

He later added, "The paper I've loved working at for 47 years is dying in darkness."

NPR's David Folkenflik contributed reporting.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
The voting booths were full Tuesday as Kansans turned out for early voting at the Palestine Senior Center in Kansas City, the first day of no-excuse absentee voting. Tammy Ljungblad/Kansas City Star via Getty Images

In the final days of the 2024 election, Republicans are hammering home the lie that there is widespread voting by noncitizens.

“Our elections are bad, and a lot of these illegal immigrants coming in, they’re trying to get them to vote,” former President Donald Trump said during the September presidential debate with his Democratic rival, Vice President Kamala Harris. “They can’t even speak English. They don’t even know what country they’re in practically. And these people are trying to get them to vote. And that’s why they’re allowing them to come into our country.”

Advertisement

On one level, Trump is once again vilifying immigrants and echoing the white nationalist Great Replacement conspiracy theory that asserts the left is trying to “import” voters to take the place of white Americans. But behind the lie is a widespread attempt to purge thousands of people, including U.S. citizens, from voter rolls. In the event Trump loses the election, this lie will likely undergird his all-but-assured campaign to declare the result rigged.

Republicans have raised the prospect of noncitizens voting for years. Trump infamously said he would have won the popular vote in 2016 but for “millions of people who voted illegally” ― a false claim for which neither Trump nor the man who started the lie, right-wing activist Gregg Phillips of the conspiracy theory group True the Vote, ever provided any evidence. As president, Trump created a shady Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity meant to investigate his false claim that millions had voted illegally. The commission shut down in 2018 without publishing any evidence of widespread voter fraud.

This time it’s worse.

“There was an explosion this year of how central this [lie] was,” said Zachary Mueller, senior research director at America’s Voice, an immigrant rights group that advocates for a path for citizenship for undocumented people. “I’ve been following this issue for many, many years, and there was a notable uptick this year.”

The lie is everywhere.

CBS News obtained a video this week of a Republican Party official and local “election integrity” leader in North Carolina telling volunteers that voters with “missing” information and “Hispanic-sounding last names” should be treated as “suspicious” if registered to vote in the final three months before Election Day.

Advertisement

James Womack, the Lee County Republican Party chair and founder of the North Carolina Election Integrity Team, told CBS News he’d need to see the “full context” of his own remarks to comment on them. Womack’s group was building the list of “suspicious” voter registrations to hand over to election officials, endangering the ability of people on the list to cast a ballot. He didn’t respond to HuffPost’s questions about what that context was.

Illegal voting by noncitizens, according to all available data, is extremely rare ― “there is no evidence that noncitizen voting has ever been significant enough to impact an election’s outcome,” according to the Bipartisan Policy Center.

On Wednesday, for example, Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger said an audit of his state’s voter rolls had found that out of 8.2 million registered voters in the state, just 20 turned out to not be U.S. citizens. Of those, only nine had ever voted in past elections, the Republican official said. Nationwide, noncitizens face criminal consequences and potential deportation for voting illegally, and election officials use federal databases and other methods to confirm voters’ eligibility.

Republicans have nevertheless made every attempt to create the impression that noncitizen voting is a major problem. Voters in eight states this year, for example, will decide on ballot measures to prohibit noncitizens from voting, even though it’s already illegal except for a handful of localities that allow noncitizen residents to vote on local issues.

In April, pushing the “SAVE Act,” a bill that would require documentary proof of citizenship to vote, House Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) participated in a news conference with Trump at Mar-a-Lago, his Florida private club, and accused Democrats of scheming to somehow allow ineligible immigrants to vote.

Advertisement

“We believe one of the reasons for this open border... is because they want to turn these people into voters,” Johnson said. He added later: “We cannot wait for widespread fraud to occur, especially when the threat of fraud is growing with every single illegal immigrant that crosses that border.” (The following month, Johnson admitted that widespread voting by noncitizens had “not been something that is easily provable.”)

Tech billionaire Elon Musk, who has spent tens of millions of dollars to help elect Trump, regularly shares similar lies and misrepresentations on X, his social media platform formerly known as Twitter, as have other influential right-wing accounts.

Cleta Mitchell, an attorney who joined Trump on his now infamous Jan. 2, 2021, call to Raffensperger, when Trump tried to pressure the Georgia official to “find” enough votes to make Trump the state’s winner, launched the Election Integrity Network (EIN) in 2021 in part to cancel thousands of supposedly suspicious voter registrations nationwide.

“The Democrats’ plan for 2024 is to change the electorate,” Mitchell said last month, testifying in support of the SAVE Act. “If they cannot persuade the American People to want their Marxist policies for America, just import voters who don’t speak the language, don’t have a shared commitment to our country and our national principles, get them into the very porous voter registration system, and collect their votes.”

“The Democrats’ plan for 2024 is to change the electorate.” - Election Integrity Network founder Cleta Mitchell

Advertisement

Womack is affiliated with the Election Integrity Network, which itself is also part of a much larger Trump-aligned network. Video of Mitchell’s remarks is featured on the webpage for the Only Citizens Vote coalition, which lists dozens of member groups, including powerful, deep-pocketed players in the election denial universe.

There is no evidence at all that Democrats ― or any others ― are working to induce noncitizens to vote.

Nonetheless, polling shows Republicans believe the rhetoric. Though large majorities of voters supporting both Harris and Trump think it’s important to stop noncitizens from voting, only 35% of Trump supporters are very or somewhat confident that noncitizens will be stopped from voting, compared with 92% of Harris supporters, according to survey results from Pew Research Center released Thursday.

One practical effect of this lie is that GOP officials in several states have cited concerns over supposed noncitizen voting in attempts to purge thousands of people from voter registration lists.

Sometimes voter registration purges ― or “list maintenance” ― happen for valid reasons, such as regular updates for when a voter’s death is confirmed by government records or when a voter confirms to election officials they’ve moved to another state.

Advertisement

Republicans, ironically, have made this kind of day-to-day data much harder to confirm, with GOP officials in several states exiting a multi-state organization (the Electronic Registration Information Center, or ERIC) that encouraged information-sharing and split the cost of expensive databases.

In its place, right-wing citizen activists have used new, error-prone software to challenge thousands of registrations at a time at the local level, even though the vast majority of these challenges are false positives. At the same time, the Republican Party and its allies have pursued lawsuits to force election officials to remove more people from the rolls, despite a federal prohibition on “systematic” purges within 90 days of an election. The 90-day “quiet period” is meant to ensure voters have sufficient time to prove their eligibility in the event they are mistakenly removed from the rolls.

In Alabama earlier this month, a federal judge ordered Secretary of State Wes Allen to stop the deactivation of more than 3,200 supposed “Noncitizens Registered to Vote in Alabama.” Allen’s August press release announcing the purge alleged people on the list had, at least at one point, “been issued noncitizen identification numbers by the Department of Homeland Security.” It granted that it was “possible” some people on his list had actually since become citizens and eligible voters but added, less than two months before Election Day, that “those naturalized citizens” would have to update their voter registration information. He also referred the entire list to the state’s attorney general for “investigation and possible criminal prosecution.”

The purge list included at least one U.S.-born citizen, NPR reported, and a lawsuit from civil rights groups listed several more citizens swept up in the purge, both naturalized and U.S.-born, including one man who simply “mistakenly checked a box on an unemployment benefits application identifying himself as a noncitizen” before correcting the error two years ago. State officials’ testimony showed that at least 2,000 people on the list ― nearly two-thirds ― were citizens and legal voters. U.S. District Judge Anna Manasco, a Trump appointee, noted in her order earlier this month that Allen “admitted that his purge list included thousands of United States citizens.”

Allen told HuffPost in a statement that he was “limited” in his ability to comment due to the ongoing litigation. He said he would comply with the court’s order and added, “State and federal laws are clear that only eligible American citizens can vote in our elections. Last week’s order does not change that.”

Advertisement

Similar GOP suits seeking purges and alleging improper voter list maintenance have been dismissed in Nevada and Michigan. A separate ongoing suit in Nevada alleges thousands of noncitizens are on the voter rolls ― even though the state’s then-Republican secretary of state debunked the claim in 2021 ― and that noncitizen voting “favors Democratic candidates and harms Republican candidates.” Last week, a Trump-appointed judge in North Carolina shot down Republicans’ attempt to invalidate 225,000 voter registrations in the state. Separately, judges in Michigan and North Carolina have shot down Republican suits targeting military and overseas voters.

In Virginia on Friday, a federal judge ordered the state to restore the voter registrations of over 1,600 people who the state had purged since August – during the 90-day “quiet period” before Election Day. The supposed noncitizens had been targeted by the governor because they chose “No” in response to questions about their citizenship status on certain Department of Motor Vehicles paperwork. The Justice Department and civil rights groups had sued the state over the quiet period purges, arguing the DMV data is unreliable, particularly because people often interact with the DMV before eventually gaining citizenship and becoming eligible to vote. Others could have simply made a mistake on paperwork.

The Justice Department cited one county board meeting in which a registrar noted that of dozens of purged “noncitizens” who’d previously voted, “Every single one of them had verified their citizenship previously, some as many as five times, and they all had Social Security numbers. We had to cancel them, because of state protocol.” He later said the majority of that group had re-registered. Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin promised Friday to appeal.

A spokesperson for Youngkin separately pointed HuffPost to a Fox News appearance in which the governor disputed the term “purge” and said people removed from voter rolls were first given “14 days to affirm they are a citizen” or otherwise cast a provisional ballot.

In a statement to HuffPost, a Trump campaign press secretary, Karoline Leavitt, falsely accused Democrats of “pushing for non-citizens to vote and influence the future of our country” and accused the Justice Department of pursuing “lawfare” against Youngkin. Democrats, the statement added, “aren’t even trying to hide their election interference schemes.”

Advertisement

This summer, Tennessee officials sent letters to thousands of voters telling them their information “matches with an individual who may not have been a United States citizen at the time of obtaining a Tennessee driver license or ID card” and warning that voting as a noncitizen was a felony punishable by two years in jail. It was only after the American Civil Liberties Union threatened legal action that the state clarified it wouldn’t be purging voters who didn’t respond to the letter with citizenship documentation.

And in August, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott (R) bragged of purging more than 6,500 supposed noncitizens from the rolls since 2021. Journalists have since determined there are numerous citizens on the list, and the clerk in Travis County, home to Austin, reported call centers were flooded with people concerned about their registration status as a result of the purge.

Abbott’s purge announcement was part of a pattern of Texans Republicans hyping up supposed noncitizen voting, including the announcement of an “undercover operation” investigating voter registration efforts and a lawsuit filed this week demanding that the federal government help determine the citizenship status of 450,000 Texans who registered to vote without providing a driver’s license or ID. (Registering without a driver’s license or state ID is legal; applicants can use a Social Security number instead, which “the state verifies ... is authentic,” a spokesperson for the secretary of state said this month. All voter registration applicants affirm they are citizens under penalty of perjury.)

Biden administration officials have pointed out that there is a federal service for confirming citizenship status. It’s known as the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements service, or SAVE, and multiple states have used it for over a decade for list maintenance. But Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton (R) filed a suit Tuesday against the Biden administration anyway, saying the service was “not an adequate tool” for verifying citizenship and noting that there was a fee to use the service. The state of Florida filed a similar suit earlier this month.

A voter casts a ballot Monday during early voting at a polling station in Deland, Florida. MIGUEL J. RODRIGUEZ CARRILLO/AFP via Getty Images

Advertisement

Judges may continue to thwart many of these efforts, but even halted purges or lawsuits work to spread the lie of widespread noncitizen voting, and they could intimidate voters who fear being punished despite being valid voters.

As election law professor Ben Berwick of the group Protect Democracy observed to The Guardian, they could also turn into “zombie” lawsuits, used to contest the outcome of the election after it occurs.

“They’re dead on arrival but will be resurrected after the election,” Berwick said. “I am virtually certain that election deniers will focus on these narratives in the post-election period, both to discredit results they don’t like and as the basis for post-election legal challenges to try and throw out certain ballots or even interfere with certification of results.”

If the effort fails in the courts, Trump and his allies could also simply use the specter of noncitizen voting ― even if it’s never established by any evidence, as was the case with lies about widespread voter fraud in 2020 ― as grounds to reject the election results anyway.

“I realized that we needed to focus on this threat of illegals voting in November because I absolutely believe that that is how they are planning to try to steal the election this year,” Mitchell told key Trump ally Charlie Kirk in June, in a conversation flagged by the investigative outlet Documented. She added that left-wing nongovernmental groups were supposedly “shepherding these migrants all over the country getting them IDs, getting them housing, paid phone cards and food cards and getting them on the voter rolls.”

Advertisement

Earlier this month, Sen. Bill Hagerty (R-Tenn.) and Rep. Andy Biggs (R-Ariz.) authored a letter signed by dozens of Republican lawmakers, including several who voted to overturn the 2020 election results, uncritically alleging that Texas and Virginia authorities had removed thousands of noncitizens from their voter rolls even though the removed voted registrations have been shown to have included U.S. citizens.

“Clearly, there is a non-negligible amount of voter participation by non-citizens in federal elections, which is not only a serious threat to the integrity of our elections and the democratic process they represent, but also has the potential to reduce Americans’ trust and confidence in election results,” they wrote. A spokesperson for Hagerty told HuffPost, “These statistics show that there are unquestionably noncitizens who are registered to vote, which is a federal crime.”

“All of the allegations against immigrants — demonizing immigrants, alleging that immigrants who are not allowed to vote are voting, basically trying to make it so that all immigrants are scared of voting ― that’s preparation for refusing to accept the results if their candidate loses,” Sylvia Albert of Common Cause told Mother Jones recently.

The lie of widespread noncitizen voting is also manifesting in the voting process itself, which could intimidate voters.

Last month, The New York Times reported on a call of Republican activists focused on supposed noncitizen voting in which a GOP chair from Georgia suggested using school enrollment records to find neighborhoods with large numbers of migrants, and an activist in the Detroit area recommended searching voter rolls for “certain types of surnames,” in the newspaper’s words, and hanging up signs in “ethnic” neighborhoods.

Advertisement

The conspiracy theory group True the Vote has drafted letters to hypothetical prospective noncitizen voters in several languages, titled “A Message From True the Vote to Non Citizens.”

“We understand that there may be people who are talking with you about voting in an American election,” the letter states. “Please know that these people are misleading you. And they’re putting you and your family at risk.”

Around the country, signs have appeared at polling places warning noncitizens about criminal penalties for illegal voting, some placed by activists, others required by election officials.

“If I was a monolingual Spanish speaker, I’m voting for the first time, just became a citizen and that is the only sign that I see, I’m going to question myself, even though I know I’m in the right, and I’m a citizen and I can vote,” Iliana Santillan, executive director of El Pueblo, a North Carolina-based Latino advocacy organization, told WNCN-TV of one bright yellow example seen around the state. The signs came from the North Carolina Election Integrity Team, Womack’s group.

“Noncitizens who wisely choose not to vote have nothing to fear,” Womack told WNCN.

The same report noted another sign, from Only Citizens Vote, that was taken down on orders from the North Carolina State Board of Elections because it used the word “extranjero” (“foreigner”) rather than noncitizen.

Advertisement

“Therefore, that sign, this particular sign by Only Citizens Vote, was inaccurate and misleading because it stated that it is a crime essentially for a foreigner to vote,” Durham County Board of Elections Director Derek Bowens said. On a call Thursday, the executive director of North Carolina’s elections board, Karen Brinson-Bell, confirmed that a “group or groups have produced signs that are not accurate in their translation” and that “a foreign-born individual may very well be a citizen and eligible to vote, and that’s why we instructed the counties to remove those signs.” Only Citizens Vote did not respond to a request for comment.

Targeting the supposed scourge of noncitizen voting has a decades-old history in American politics, including with Trump’s own allies.

Last year, during a podcast taping with Trump allies Steve Bannon and Kari Lake, Rudy Giuliani admitted to a “dirty trick” that he said his campaign for New York City mayor played in 1993.

“So they went through East Harlem, which is all Hispanic, and they gave out little cards, and the card said, ‘If you come to vote, make sure you have your green card because [the Immigration and Naturalization Service] are picking up illegals.’ So they spread it all over the Hispanic...” Giuliani trailed off.

“That’s the way we kept down the Hispanic vote,” he added later, before correcting himself at Lake’s urging. “The Hispanic illegal vote, which takes away the Hispanic legal vote.”
Russia is behind fake video of ballots being destroyed, U.S. officials say

toggle caption Hannah Beier/Getty Images

Russia manufactured and spread a fake video that purports to show someone destroying ballots marked for former President Donald Trump in Pennsylvania, U.S. officials said on Friday.

The phony video was quickly debunked by local election officials and the district attorney’s office in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. But it still circulated widely on social media, including Elon Musk's X, where it racked up hundreds of thousands of views.

"This Russian activity is part of Moscow's broader effort to raise unfounded questions about the integrity of the U.S. election and stoke divisions among Americans," the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said in a joint statement.

Russian propagandists have also created fake videos targeting Vice President Harris and her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz.

Sponsor Message

The purported Bucks County video shows a person's hands opening envelopes and removing and examining the ballots inside. The person rips up ballots marked for Trump, cursing at the former president, while leaving ballots marked for Harris alone. "Vote Harris," the voice says at one point.

But the envelopes and ballots shown are not what the county uses to vote, the Bucks County Board of Elections said.

The video was posted by an X account that last week shared another video making false accusations against Walz, which intelligence officials have also attributed to Russia. The account has also promoted the baseless QAnon conspiracy theory.

Darren Linvill, co-director of Clemson University’s Media Forensics Hub, traced the Bucks County video back to a Russian propaganda operation known as "Storm-1516", first identified by Clemson, which is known for its tactic of producing staged videos that it then launders through influencers and phony news outlets.

"The particular video about Bucks County came from an account that we were familiar with," Linvill said. "It has originated Storm-1516 narratives before."

He said the operation has consistent "tells" including a focus on wedge issues, the use of particular actors and "stylistic elements of their videos that suggest to us that these things certainly aren't authentic."

Sponsor Message

Microsoft has said the same Russian Storm-1516 operation was also behind a staged video falsely accusing Harris of injuring someone in a hit-and-run in 2011, which was spread via a website claiming to be a local San Francisco TV station. There is no evidence any such incident occurred, and the purported TV station does not exist.

NPR's Miles Parks contributed reporting to this story.
Rogan: OK, but give me some examples of how.

Trump: Well, let’s start on the top and the easy ones. They were supposed to get legislative approval to do the things they did, and they didn’t get it. In many cases, they didn’t get it.

Rogan: What things?

Trump: Anything.

Rogan: Legislative approval of?

Trump: Like for extensions of the voting, for voting earlier, for this — all different things. By law, they had to get legislative approvals. You don’t have to go any further than that.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

HOUSTON (AP) — Kamala Harris and Beyoncé ignited a Houston rally with a double-barreled argument against Donald Trump on Friday, with the superstar telling the Democratic nominee’s biggest crowd ever that it was “time to sing a new song” as Harris warned that her GOP opponent was dead set on further eroding women’s rights.

The rally was set in reliably Republican Texas, to highlight the growing medical fallout from the state’s strict abortion ban, but the message was intended to register in the political battleground states, where Harris is hoping that the aftereffects from the fall of Roe v. Wade will spur voters to turn out to support her quest for the presidency.

Advertisement

“For all the men and women in this room, and watching around the country, we need you,” Beyoncé said in a rare political appearance. The megastar’s speech was lofty, joyful and optimistic — a temper to the seriousness of the topic and of the message Harris was there to bring.

“I’m here as a mother, a mother who cares deeply about the world my children and all of our children live in,” Beyoncé said. “A world where we have freedom to control our bodies, a world where we’re not divided.”

“I’m not here as a celebrity. I’m not here as a politician. I’m here as a mother.” - Beyoncé speaks at Kamala Harris’ rally in Houston pic.twitter.com/taWpVhF6DC — philip lewis (@Phil_Lewis_) October 26, 2024

Harris came out to huge cheers. She told the crowd that Trump had erased half a century of hard-fought progress when he appointed the Supreme Court justices who overturned Roe and touched off a growing healthcare crisis.

Advertisement

She listed off downstream effects she sees from various bans. Women who never intended to end a pregnancy are suffering devastating complications when they can’t get care. They have fewer options, and fewer medical students are choosing to specialize in women’s health.

“For anyone watching from another state, if you think you are protected from Trump abortion bans because you live in Michigan, Pennsylvania, Nevada, New York, California, or any state where voters or legislators have protected reproductive freedom, please know: No one is protected,” Harris warned. “Because a Donald Trump national ban will outlaw abortion in every single state.”

“All that to say, elections matter,” she said.

Trump has been inconsistent in his message to voters on abortion and reproductive rights, though he’s said he’d veto a national abortion ban. He has repeatedly shifted his stance and offered vague, contradictory and at times nonsensical answers to questions on an issue that has become a major vulnerability for Republicans in this year’s election.

Trump was also in Texas Friday, where he predicted he’d break records for the number of people deported from the United States if he wins the election. He taped a podcast with Joe Rogan before heading to a rally in Traverse City, Michigan, where he took the stage three hours late.

Harris was joined at the rally by women who have nearly died from sepsis and other pregnancy complications because they were unable to get proper medical care. Some of them have already been out campaigning for Harris and others have told their harrowing tales in campaign ads that seek to show how the issue has ballooned into something far bigger than the right to end an unwanted pregnancy.

Advertisement

Since abortion was restricted in Texas, the state’s infant death rate has increased, more babies have died of birth defects and maternal mortality has risen.

The crowd waited for hours, wearing flashing red, white and blue LED bracelets as “trust women” and “freedom” flashed on big screens between acts.

“Sometimes they forget about us because we’re a Republican state,” Rhonda Johnson, who has been living in Houston for 19 years, said. “But I’m glad she’s here.”

Reproductive rights, the economy and LGBTQ issues were key reasons for Yannick Djomatchoua in his decision to support Harris and wait in the hours-long line to see her. “It’s very personal,” he said, adding that he knew friends who had to make difficult decisions due to the state’s abortion restrictions.

Harris’ campaign has taken on Beyoncé’s 2016 track “Freedom” as its anthem, and the message dovetails with the vice president’s emphasis on reproductive freedom. Beyoncé was joined by her mother, Tina Knowles, and her former bandmate Kelly Rowland, who all spoke about Harris’ historic candidacy and a dream of a more united nation.

Advertisement

“Our voices sing a chorus of unity,” Beyoncé said. “They sing a song of dignity and opportunity — are y’all ready?”

Harris was also joined by country legend Willie Nelson, who sang some of his greatest hits, including “On the Road Again.”

“Hey, how are y’all doing?” the 91-year-old Nelson asked the crowd. “Are we ready to say Madam President?”

Democrats warn that a winnowing of rights and freedoms will only continue if Trump is elected. Republican lawmakers in states across the U.S. have been rejecting Democrats’ efforts to protect or expand access to birth control, for example.

Advertisement

“In America, freedom is not to be given. It is not to be bestowed. It is ours. By right. And that includes the fundamental freedom of a woman to make decisions about her own body and not have the government telling her what to do,” Harris said.

HOUSTON, TEXAS - OCTOBER 25: Democratic presidential candidate, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris, speaks during a campaign rally at Shell Energy Stadium on October 25, 2024 in Houston, Texas. Vice President Kamala Harris is campaigning in Texas holding a rally supporting reproductive rights with recording artists Beyonce and Willie Nelson. (Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images) Justin Sullivan via Getty Images

There is some evidence to suggest that abortion rights may drive women to the polls as it did during the 2022 midterm elections. Voters in seven states, including some conservative ones, have either protected abortion rights or defeated attempts to restrict them in statewide votes over the past two years.

About 6 in 10 Americans think their state should generally allow a person to obtain a legal abortion if they don’t want to be pregnant for any reason, according to a July poll from The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.

Democrats also hope Harris’ visit will give a boost to Rep. Colin Allred, who is making a longshot bid to unseat Republican Texas Sen. Ted Cruz. Allred said Friday that if you vote to overturn a woman’s constitutional right, as Cruz did, then you should lose your job.

Advertisement

Texas encapsulates the post-Roe landscape. Its strict abortion ban prohibits physicians from performing abortions once cardiac activity is detected, which can happen as early as six weeks or before.

As a result, women are increasingly suffering worse medical care. That’s in part because doctors cannot intervene unless a woman is facing a life-threatening condition, or to prevent “substantial impairment of major bodily function.”

“Texas’ abortion bans unleashed by Donald Trump almost cost me my life and have left me with physical and emotional scars,” said Ondrea Cummings, who lost her 16-week baby and nearly died from sepsis when she couldn’t get care fast enough.

“I never thought I would have this type of personal experience. If it can happen to me, it can happen to anyone.”

___
The Jan. 6 riot included Marines. The military is wrestling with the consequences

toggle caption Kent Nishimura/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images

For more reporting about Josh Abate and extremism in the military, listen to the new series 'A Good Guy' from NPR's Embedded podcast.

“Have you ever tried to overthrow the U.S. government?”

If you’re trying to get top secret security clearance for a government job, that’s a standard question for the required polygraph exam. And the answer, obviously, should be no.

But Josh Abate couldn’t say no if he wanted to pass the test.

“It depends,” he said, when he took the exam in early 2022 for an internship.

The polygrapher paused and asked him to elaborate.

Sponsor Message

“Well, on January 6th, I went into the Capitol building.”

That was the first time Abate, a 24-year-old sergeant in the Marines, had talked openly about what he did that day.

At that point, he was doing well in the Marines. He made sergeant early, got a Navy commendation medal and was selected for this coveted internship with the National Security Agency.

“If you get the internship, you can basically ride that out until retirement if you wanted to,” he said. “It exponentially grows your career.”

Abate has always wanted to be a Marine. “There's nothing else I wanted to do. There was no plan B,” he said. “It was Marine Corps.”

Abate is tall and muscular, with short brown hair and a bit of a baby face. One of his forearms is covered in a large and colorful tattoo depicting the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. It’s from Revelations 6, he says.

He grew up in rural Virginia, about 30 miles west of Washington, D.C., and met his wife, Ashley, when they were both in high school taking part in Junior ROTC. Abate is the son of a former Marine who became a cop. He tells us his dad is a Republican and his mom, a nurse, is a Democrat. Abate recalls that they would often argue about politics.

toggle caption Facebook

But for Josh and Ashley, there was one politician for them: Donald Trump.

Ashley is blond and petite, and the day NPR interviewed her, she held their infant daughter as she spoke to us.

She called Trump a moral man and said they share the same values.

“You know, I come from a household where religion, manners, work ethic, that kind of thing, is very important,” she said.

And Josh? He said he likes the fact that Trump is supportive of a strong military.

Sponsor Message

Josh said he gets most of his news from Fox and conservative websites. When asked, he said he hasn’t seen headlines like when Trump called fallen soldiers “losers” and questioned John Kelly, his former chief of staff, saying, “I don't get it. What was in it for them?" at a 2017 Memorial Day event in Arlington National Cemetery, where Kelly’s Marine son, Robert Kelly, is buried. He was killed in Afghanistan in 2010.

A text invite

In the months before Jan. 6, 2021, Abate was at Marine Base Quantico, about an hour south of Washington. Fox News was playing on several base TVs most of the time. The pandemic was raging. Tens of thousands of Americans had died from COVID-19 at that point and most public spaces like bars and restaurants had been shut down. Abate and his fellow Marines were stuck in the barracks, day after day, staring at screens. The Marines even canceled a training trip to Norway.

Abate found that annoying.

“We were just cooped up in our rooms,” he recalled. “You didn’t join the Marine Corps to stay in your bedroom and work for a couple of hours a day and play video games.”

After the elections that November, the main message being spread by Fox anchors, reporters and guests was the same: Joe Biden had “stolen” a victory from President Donald Trump. Abate was buying into it.

So were two of his friends, Sgt. Dodge Hellonen and Cpl. Micah Coomer. They were planning to drive out to Washington, D.C., for the now infamous “Stop the Steal” rally. And they texted Abate, asking him if he wanted to come along. He said he accepted because he wanted to listen to Trump’s speech.

“I actually wanted to see him speak in person, like, the last time as sitting president,” Abate said.

toggle caption Eric Lee/Bloomberg via Getty Images

The two Marines picked up Abate at his home and drove north to Washington. But he said the traffic getting into D.C. slowed them down, so they missed the speech on the Ellipse, near the White House, which ended with Trump telling the crowd that they had to fight for their country. “We’re going to walk down to the Capitol,” Trump said.

Sponsor Message

Abate said they all noticed a crowd heading that way and joined in, crossing the wide lawn toward the iconic building.

Something ugly

They entered through the Senate wing doors about seven minutes after the crowd broke through. This was the first entrance to be breached that day, so Abate and his friends were among the first people to actually go into the Capitol.

“We walked right in,” he said. “We didn't see any signs that, you know, said ‘do not enter’ or ‘no trespassing.’ And as soon as we walked through the door of the Capitol building, there were two police officers standing right across from the door. I figured if we weren't supposed to be there, they would have told us to get out. Nobody was trying to be, like, rambunctious.”

He told us he was inside the Capitol for about an hour and saw or heard no yelling, breaking glass, or violence.

toggle caption Shay Horse/NurPhoto via Getty Images

But we were outside the Capitol at the exact same time and we experienced something very different — something ugly — and reported on that extensively. While getting crushed by a crowd of angry Trump supporters, we met rioters who spoke proudly into NPR microphones about plans to hang politicians from gallows before storming up the marble steps and surging through doors and windows. The overwhelming evidence is of one of the most violent and shocking days in American history.

Meanwhile, Abate said he calmly and quietly strolled the halls for about an hour, helped put a MAGA hat on a statue, and then finally left with his friends when police ordered everyone out.

Then he said they drove south, back toward Quantico, before joining Ashley at a restaurant called Fatty’s.

“Holy crap”

While they were eating, every TV screen in the restaurant showed images of a raging mob at the Capitol, surging into the building and punching cops, smashing some with flagpoles and their own shields.

“We were all just looking at it like, holy crap,” Ashley said.

She said she turned to her husband, wide-eyed. “Did you see any of the stuff they’re talking about?” she said she asked him that night.

He said no. But all three Marines looked at each other. “Like, we should probably not talk about this,” Abate remembered. He told us he took out his phone and started deleting all pictures and videos from the day.

toggle caption FBI

“I knew that if word broke that Marines were in the Capitol it would reflect badly on the Marine Corps,” Abate told us. “And I knew that even though I didn’t do anything bad — I didn’t cause any violence, I didn’t perpetrate any sedition or treason and things like that — I knew that I would just be grouped into everything.”

Sponsor Message

The three never talked about Jan. 6 with each other again. And before long, Coomer was transferred to another assignment at Camp Pendleton, Calif. Hellonen was off to Camp Lejeune, N.C.

Over a year later, Abate passed that polygraph test — the one where he admitted being in the Capitol on Jan. 6. He was sent to a special signals intelligence school in Florida. Josh and his wife returned to the Washington, D.C., area at the end of 2023, ready to start that prized internship and set up a home with Ashley, who had just found out she was pregnant.

“Just be truthful”

Just two weeks before Abate was about to start his NSA job at Fort Meade in Maryland, he got a text. His sergeant wanted to meet for a cup of coffee. “Change into civilian clothes,” he told Abate, who figured the meeting was about his internship. But after passing the building where Abate was supposed to work, they pulled into the parking lot of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service.

“So NCIS just wants to ask you a few questions,” the sergeant told him. “Nothing to worry about. Just be truthful.”

Abate said he got a sinking feeling.

A half dozen agents came from both sides of the building and surrounded him, telling him he was under arrest for Jan. 6. They clasped on handcuffs and escorted him to an interrogation room.

“I was like, s***, this is happening,” Abate said.

They showed him pictures of himself inside the Capitol, along with Hellonen and Coomer. Then they put Abate in the back seat of a government car and drove him south to Washington, where he was booked. He spent the night in jail, sleeping on a metal bench with a bright light shining from the ceiling.

What he didn’t know yet was that not all of his Marine friends were able to keep that vow of silence about being inside the Capitol.

Sponsor Message

According to the FBI, just three weeks after Jan. 6, Coomer sent a private message to a friend. An FBI search warrant found that he was talking about the extremist movements present in the Capitol that day, including guys in Hawaiian shirts who often call themselves the Boogaloo Bois. Coomer said to his friend, “I’m waiting for a Boogaloo.”

His friend wrote back asking, “What’s that?”

Coomer simply replied: “Civil War 2.”

Both Coomer and Hellonen declined our requests for comment.

The charm offensive

All three Marines were charged with the same crimes in early 2023. Federal prosecutors had them on four charges, including entering a restricted building and disorderly conduct.

Over the next few months, Abate was placed on administrative duty at work. And as he and Ashley waited at home for the legal case to run its course, the grim reality set in. “You think all the typical things,” she said. “Like, what are we going to do when he loses his job?”

Abate and his lawyer, Dave Dischley, a family friend in Warrenton, Va., were eventually able to work out a deal with prosecutors. They were willing to drop most charges in exchange for a guilty plea on just one misdemeanor. And the recommendation was a reduced sentence of 21 days in jail.

Abate appeared before U.S. District Judge Ana Reyes, a Biden appointee. She was assigned to Hellonen and Coomer, as well. She declined a request for an interview.

But what we know about Judge Reyes is that, going into the sentencing, she was openly stunned that a Marine would participate in the insurrection. “It’s scary to think that our active duty military were part of the insurrection,” Reyes told Abate, according to a transcript of the hearing. Reyes said she was inclined to give Abate six months behind bars.

Sponsor Message

Abate told the court in a written statement that he was wrong about the election being stolen, about what Trump was telling the country. “Each of the lies circulated by President Trump were incredibly harmful to our democracy and our unity as a nation.”

And then came the letters. More than 50 of them from family members, friends and fellow Marines. Judge Reyes said she read them all beforehand. Twice.

One was from a Gold Star mom whose son was killed in 2011. “I have met many Marines that are truly good Marines and good people,” she wrote. “Josh is one of those Marines.”

The mother of a childhood friend wrote: “Even though I’m a strong liberal, I would never consider Josh to be a threat. I truly believe he is just fundamentally good.”

Not everyone was willing to write a letter. Abate said a fellow Marine told him basically, "Josh, I like you, but not what you did."

But there were more than enough to sway Reyes. She went as far as telling Abate that his case had made her a “better judge.” And she gave him a sentence: 279 hours of community service — one hour she said, for each Marine casualty in the American Civil War.

“She mentioned something about how she’s kind of envious of the story that I can tell my daughter and help her learn from my mistakes,” Abate told us. So this federal judge had gone from being openly disgusted with Abate for joining the violent mob at the Capitol, to essentially helping to craft a redemption story for him.

“Maybe this won’t be so bad after all,” Abate remembers thinking.

An unlikely assist

Earlier this year, NPR spent several hours talking with Abate and wanted to learn more about his activities that day. His description of the insurrection — that he meandered in and never really noticed that what he was doing was wrong — just didn’t make sense based on what we saw that day.

Sponsor Message

We went through a few other direct questions about Abate’s actions that day.

Did you chant?

“No.”

Of the statue he put the MAGA hat on: A statue of what? A specific person?

“I don’t remember,” he said. “It was just a random statue in the Rotunda.”

He really didn’t see anything disturbing or aggressive?

“I think if I had seen any violence, I would have left sooner,” he said.

On Feb. 21, he called us back for a second interview. When we arrived, he was holding a printout from the FBI’s official statement of facts and started reading from it.

“ ‘Abate appears in the crowd and then he walks,’ ” he said. “And it talks about how he walks and walks and walks and walks and walks. And nothing in our summary of our actions is actually, you know, spooky or violent or scary. I thought it was humorous that they, in their summary of me, my time in the Capitol building, that’s all they could really sum it up to was walking.”

But down at the bottom of the printout it said “Page 1 of 45.” So clearly there was a lot more to the story.

Including video.

A few weeks after we talked with Abate, the House Republicans started dropping some 5,000 hours of security camera footage from Jan. 6 on a public video platform, including time stamps. The security footage does not contain any audio.

What we saw was that seven minutes after the doors to the Capitol were breached, Abate walked in with Hellonen and Coomer. They slowly made their way toward the front of a crowd just 20 steps from the House chamber itself. At one point, Abate cupped his hands around his mouth, and the video shows he clearly is chanting “stop the steal” over and over. At one point, Abate is holding a yellow flag with the words “Don’t Tread on Me.” He appears to gesture to his friends to follow him to the front of the crowd toward the chamber doors. Soon, tear gas starts to fill the hallway. They make their way out of the space and back into the Capitol Rotunda.

Sponsor Message

Way in the back of the Rotunda video, you can make out Abate taking a hat out of someone’s hands and trying to place it on top of a statue. He finally gets it on there by climbing onto the pedestal.

It’s a bust of Martin Luther King Jr.

From there, Abate and his friends became part of a large, rowdy crowd. The front of the crowd is facing off against a line of Capitol Police who are attempting to push everyone out. Abate stands firm amid the crush and scuffles happening around him, not turning around and leaving. Finally, after several minutes and jostling in the crowd around them, the three of them make their way out of the Rotunda and out of frame.

The story that Abate told us — about an almost casual stroll through the Capitol — just didn’t hold up.

We called his lawyer to tell him what we’d just watched and to ask to sit down with him again. Abate declined.

toggle caption Saul Loeb/AFP via Getty Images

The Marines and Jan. 6

Despite avoiding jail time, Abate’s career with the Marines was still on the line. In December 2023, he had a retention hearing, where a panel of his colleagues would decide whether he stayed or would be kicked out. It was held in a nondescript government building at Quantico. The hearing lasted 4½ hours.

Retention hearings are administrative but structured like a courtroom. There was a Marine officer who argued in Abate’s defense, saying he was remorseful and accepted responsibility for what he did. His defense lawyer, Dave Dischley, was also there.

Ashley and their baby showed up to support him. Dischley made sure to introduce them to the room.

Another officer served as a kind of prosecutor. One of the points he argued is that Abate by his actions violated an agreement he signed when he joined — one that explicitly forbids participation in extremist activities. The officer said Abate should be kicked out with an other-than-honorable discharge, a red flag to all future employers.

Sponsor Message

Several Marines acted as witnesses, all telling the panel that Abate is a fine Marine.

“I would say that his initiative is top-notch, sir,” one said.

“By far the most outstanding professional Marine I’ve ever encountered,” said another. “Gentlemen, I wouldn’t be here if someone didn’t give me a second chance. If he can pull off what I know he’s capable of, as a man, as a Marine, as a father, he will show that growth can occur, and that he can overcome even something as trivial as this.”

And then something truly startling happens. The panel includes two officers and a senior sergeant. They all are asked by Abate’s defense attorney about their views on the attack on the Capitol. Are they positive, negative or indifferent?

“Depending on what news source you look at, you get a different narrative, different perception," Lt. Col. Sean Foley said. "It’s a tale of two cities, and at this point, I mean, to be honest I’m tired of hearing about it three years later.”

Then Master Gunnery Sgt. Steven Glew, who said, “So I wasn’t there. I can’t say I know exactly what happened there. So I’m indifferent to what happened that day.”

And finally, Capt. Spencer Morris: “The video footage I’ve seen of the day, specifically focused on the more violent parts of Jan. 6, it definitely gives me a negative perception of how things transpired.”

In the end, the panel unanimously decided to keep Abate in the Marine Corps. Separate panels for Hellonen and Coomer did the same. But Coomer was kicked out shortly after his hearing by a general at Camp Pendleton; Hellonen ran out his enlistment — his contract with the Marines was up — and he left the Corps.

Glew, who had said he was indifferent to what happened that day, was the only one of the panelists who agreed to talk with us about why he voted to retain Abate.

Sponsor Message

“I have just seen a lot of him in me,” Glew said. “And then, you know, just seeing his family there, his baby, just made me think, you know about my family and what they would have been going through if I was in Josh’s position.”

Extremism in the ranks?

Secretary of the Navy Carlos Del Toro will be the one who makes the final decision about Abate’s fate in the Marines. Ten months later, he has yet to make the call.

Digging into Abate’s story and the aftermath of Jan. 6, we learned that Abate was by far not the only Marine — active or retired — who went into the Capitol that day. Some one-third of the 200 active and retired military participants arrested for their role in the Capitol attack were Marines. That’s a disproportionate number, considering the Marines are the smallest of the fighting forces.

“It is shocking when somebody that’s taken an oath to protect the country is doing something to harm it,” said Michael Jensen, who researches domestic terrorism at the University of Maryland. He said the Marines have one of the highest rates of extremist activity going back more than three decades.

“The Army is the largest branch, so you’d expect for it to have the highest numbers,” he said. “But the second highest number comes from the Marine Corps. They are having an outsized impact driving these numbers of cases, yet they are doing the fewest investigations.”

The Jan. 6 attack forced the Pentagon to come up with a definition of prohibited extremist activity. That definition came out at the end of 2021, and it basically says service members can’t get involved in any activities that call for political violence, passing out literature or raising money for extremist groups, liking something on social media, even wearing clothing or having bumper stickers that promote extremist causes.

Each of the services this year put out guidelines and said they would start collecting data on any extremist activities in the ranks. Right now, the military has yet to start collecting data that was called for in the recently released guidelines, but Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and other officials say they think the numbers are small. Still, some say that even a small number of extremists can have an outsized effect on the military force.

We have spent the last six months trying to get officials to talk about the new guidelines, and most have refused. But just a few weeks ago, we were able to ask the Marines' top officer, Gen. Eric Smith, this question: Do the Marines have an extremism problem?

He said a minuscule percentage of Marines engage in inappropriate behavior.

“What I don’t want to do is hit a fly with a sledgehammer,” he said, “and accuse all Marines of doing something untoward because that’s just not the case.”

But what about the lopsided number of Marines who took part in the Capitol attack?

“No, I don’t worry about that. I think what you see is an anomaly. Those individuals who participated in the Jan. 6 events, those weren’t Marines. They were individuals masquerading as Marines. Our culture didn’t bind to them.”

We’d heard the word “anomaly” before. In Abate’s retention hearing from his defense lawyer Dave Dischley.

“The odds that another event like January 6th is going to occur in this country, you know, in the next hundred years in this country, I think is very slim,” Dischley said. “I think we can all agree to that. The odds that Sergeant Abate would be a part of that? Less than a fraction of a percent.”

toggle caption Evelyn Hockstein/for The Washington Post via Getty Images

But an Associated Press investigation found that nearly 100 people were killed or injured since 2017 in plots that included U.S. military or veterans, most of them in service of a far-right agenda.

In mid-October — just weeks before the 2024 election — Trump was asked about the Capitol attack at a Univision town hall. His answer was defensive and laced with inaccuracies. He also called it “a day of love.”

As for Abate, he wasn’t ruling out another vote for Trump in 2024.

“I still like Trump,” he said. “There's no bad taste in my mouth about Trump.” But, he said, he was still deciding.

We called Josh Abate back one more time as we wrapped up reporting, to ask again if he still liked Trump. But through his lawyer, he declined to speak with us again. He was done telling his story.
GOP lawsuits about an obscure immigration database may set up election challenges

toggle caption Miguel J. Rodriguez Carrillo/AFP via Getty Images

As former President Donald Trump and his allies spread baseless conspiracy theories about Democrats bringing in noncitizens to vote illegally, GOP state officials are escalating last-minute demands on the Biden administration to check the citizenship of voters on their state rolls.

In recent days, Florida, Texas and Ohio have each sued the U.S. Department of Homeland Security over the issue. They argue a longstanding data sharing program, which the federal government has offered states over the last dozen years for this purpose, is insufficient.

"The Biden-Harris Administration has refused to comply with the law and has failed to supply Texas with the required information necessary to secure the integrity of Texas elections," Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton said in a statement.

Sponsor Message

But with Election Day around the corner, the states' demands are coming far too late to be considered credible, according to election law experts and voting officials.

Instead, the lawsuits are "in service of a fraudulent narrative — which is the notion that widespread numbers of noncitizens are intentionally registering and voting — which is patent garbage," said Justin Levitt, a constitutional law professor at Loyola Law School who also served as an adviser on voting rights issues for the Biden administration.

Levitt said lawsuits filed right before an election usually request expedited review, but none of these suits did, indicating that the goal may be to publicize the issue rather than get a ruling quickly.

Kim Wyman — a Republican former secretary of state of Washington who also served as senior adviser for election security to DHS' Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Agency — agreed that the timing of the lawsuits seemed more like "posturing" and planning for post-election litigation.

"What I've seen in my experience of elections is that when a group or an organization or a person files a lawsuit related to an election this close to Election Day, they're really kind of putting a placeholder in," Wyman said.

Kenneth Parreno, an attorney with the nonprofit Protect Democracy that describes itself as "defeating the authoritarian threat," calls suits like these "zombies."

Sponsor Message

"These are lawsuits that are dead on arrival because they're meritless" Parreno said, adding that after the election, litigants could potentially "bring these claims back to life and point to them as a basis for challenging the outcome of the election and trying to stop the lawful transition of power."



An America First priority

toggle caption Chandan Khanna/AFP via Getty Images

Florida, Texas and Ohio are among several Republican-led states that recently asked the federal government to verify citizens on their voter rolls, though so far they are the only ones to have filed lawsuits.

America First Legal, an organization led by former Trump senior adviser Stephen Miller, sent letters to states over the summer with an "emergency action plan" that encouraged them to make such requests and said states could sue if DHS failed to respond. At least a half dozen states then sent letters with data requests to DHS' U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.

In a June press release, Miller, who is credited as the architect of Trump's immigration policies, claimed without citing evidence that Biden was "handing out voter registration forms to migrants" and there is a "direct effort to sabotage the 2024 election through potential mass illegal alien voting."



Finding citizenship data isn't easy

Everyone who registers to vote in federal elections must attest, under penalty of perjury, that they are U.S. citizens. Documented cases of noncitizens voting in federal races are incredibly rare, likely because those who try face the possibility of prison and deportation.

There is no database of all U.S. citizens. Election officials typically use a hodgepodge of different data sources to suss out whether their rolls are accurate and up-to-date.

Since 2012, the federal government has offered states the opportunity to use a federal immigration data system known as Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements, or SAVE, as a tool for checking if a potential voter is a naturalized citizen, a noncitizen who has interacted with the federal government or someone who acquired U.S. citizenship after being born abroad.

SAVE does not include records for American citizens born in the U.S. or people who entered the country illegally and have remained off the radar of federal officials. Not all of the data is necessarily up to date. Searches cost $1.50 per query, and agencies can only search for people one at a time.

Sponsor Message

The system's burdensome quirks have long been a thorn in the side of voting officials, so its use has been fairly limited for elections.

Just 10 states are registered with U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services to use the SAVE system for voting purposes, and even fewer have systems in place to use it regularly to clean up their voting lists. Four of the 10 states registered in the past few months. Some states that do not have a SAVE agreement for voting purposes check voter citizenship in other ways, such as by cross-checking data with the department of motor vehicles.

Georgia recently began doing regular SAVE searches of registered voters who had indicated in other interactions with the state that they were noncitizens. A recent audit yielded 20 suspected noncitizens on the rolls, out of 8.2 million registered voters (0.00024% of the state's list).

Florida has been using SAVE for elections since 2012 and Texas has been working with USCIS to gain access to it for voter list maintenance, according to court filings. Ohio's agreement began in July, and the state logged more than 20,000 queries.

The argument put forth by America First Legal, and echoed in state letters, however, is that SAVE is not a sufficient resource because it requires states to know an alien identification number or citizenship certificate number to query the system. The states are asking the federal government to offer checks based on first name, last name and date of birth of registered voters using a different system reserved for internal federal government use.

With just weeks before Election Day, states made enormous requests. Texas asked the federal government to check 454,289 voters, and Indiana requested verification for 585,774, even though the states offered no reason to believe those voters may not be citizens.

Such checks would have to be done individually and manually by federal government employees and still would not yield a "definitive result," according to an official at the Department of Homeland Security, who spoke to NPR on background.

The director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, Ur Jaddou, responded on Oct. 10 to all states who had made requests, saying that the SAVE program "is the most secure and efficient way to reliably verify an individual's citizenship or immigration status," and said the agency "currently cannot offer an alternative process to any state."



Requests that missed the federal deadline

Both Florida and Texas sent their data requests to the federal government during a period in which federal law prohibits systematic purging of voters. Ohio's initial request was filed just before that period began.

Sponsor Message

During the 90-day "quiet period" before an election, states cannot use database matching to systematically remove voters from rolls.

The rule is to ensure that eligible citizens are not removed in error right before an election.

"States did not act in good faith months and months ago when systematic database matching might have been lawful depending on the way that they went about it," said Kate Huddleston, an attorney with Campaign Legal Center, which has sued states this election cycle for not observing the quiet period.

"Instead [they] are raising this really at the eleventh hour at a time when it would be unlawful to do exactly what they want to do," Huddleston said.

When asked about the timing of Texas' request given the 90-day rule, Alicia Pierce, a spokesperson for the Texas secretary of state, wrote in an email: "All voter list maintenance is being done in compliance with state and federal law."

Dan Lusheck, a spokesperson for the Ohio secretary of state, said the state began requesting information in the summer. "The Department failed to respond to several times, and ultimately waited until mid-October to reject the request. Their inaction determined the timing of the lawsuit."

Florida's Department of State did not respond to an NPR inquiry about that point.

A senior election official in a state that uses SAVE agreed that the timing of the requests and the lawsuits made clear the states were not serious in their efforts. The election official, who did not have permission to speak on the record about the issue, told NPR that voting administrators across the political spectrum have been frustrated with SAVE for years, but that this sort of "gamesmanship" is only meant to score political points, not improve voting lists.

"All these people, even the ones that are bringing the lawsuits, know full well that there aren't more than a handful of noncitizens registered to vote," said the official, who has worked for both Republican and Democratic administrations. "But they can make a lot of political hay by bringing it up now."

Sponsor Message

In the days after Florida filed its lawsuit, an analysis by the University of Washington's Center for an Informed Public found the announcement prompted the spread of misleading narratives on social media about noncitizens voting and the federal government's actions.

The voting official added they assumed the states suing are actually hoping to lose their cases, so they have something to point to should the election not go Donald Trump's way.

"The really sad truth is that in the deep, dark recesses of their brains, they're hoping they lose these cases so that they continue to have problems accessing that data and can use it as a political cudgel to make their point," the official said.
House Speaker Mike Johnson has repeatedly insisted that he would perform his constitutional duty — if he deems the 2024 election “free and fair.” Illustration:Jianan Liu/HuffPost; Photo: Getty Images

When he was slinging french fries for a photo op at McDonald’s last weekend in Pennsylvania, Donald Trump fielded a question from a reporter who asked him if he would accept the results of the election no matter the outcome.

“Yeah, sure, if it’s a fair election. Always. I would always accept it if it’s a fair election,” Trump said.

Advertisement

Speaker of the House Mike Johnson also offered a conditional response when reporters asked him less than a month ago if he would commit to observing regular order in the electoral certification process in January 2025.

“Well of course, if we have a free, fair and safe election, we’re going to follow the Constitution. Absolutely, yes,” Johnson.

NBC’s Kristen Welker pressed Johnson again on “Meet the Press” in mid-October — she asked if he would certify the election “regardless of who wins.”

“Regardless? Yes, if the election is a free and fair election, and we pray and hope that it is. There’s a lot of work being done to make sure that’s true. I think this one will be so large there will be no question, and I think Donald Trump is your next president,” he said.

Advertisement

Johnson’s repeated insistence that he would perform his constitutional duty only if he deems the election “free and fair” has alarmed Democrats and many experts, given Johnson’s clear allegiance to the lie that the 2020 election that Donald Trump lost was neither free nor fair.

Johnson adamantly promoted Trump’s baseless voter fraud claims in 2020. He asked 105 Republicans to sign on to a letter of support to the Supreme Court for a lawsuit filed in Texas that year seeking to delay the certification of electoral results in battleground states even after it was established that Trump’s claims of fraud were bunk.

That was when Johnson was a junior Republican, unheard of to most Americans. Now he is the speaker of the House. These days, he is once again fearmongering about the fairness of presidential elections. He has suggested, contrary to any evidence, that there will be fraud in 2024 due to huge swaths of undocumented immigrants casting ballots.

And, if Republicans retain control of the lower chamber after this election and Johnson can hold onto the speakership, the Trump ally will be remarkably well-positioned to advance any agenda Trump and his allies in Congress share.

Even if Johnson does not succeed in derailing the election’s certification should Kamala Harris win, any futile efforts he might undertake could still prove dangerous.

Advertisement

The scars of Jan. 6, 2021, remain in 2024. A Trump-appointed judge who sentenced seditious conspirator and Proud Boys member Joseph Biggs in August 2023 put it succinctly after listening to months of evidence about a conspiracy to stop the transfer of power in January 2021.

“What happened that day… it broke our tradition of the peaceful transfer of power. Which is the most precious thing we had as Americans,” U.S. District Judge Timothy Kelly said. “Notice I say ‘had,’ we don’t have it anymore.”

The Rules Of Engagement

The new Congress will be ushered in just a few days before the certification of the election on Jan. 6, 2025. If Harris wins in November and the House of Representatives regains a Democratic majority, House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D-N.Y.) will likely preside over the election certification process in the lower chamber.

But if Harris wins the election and the House of Representatives retains its Republican majority, the path ahead is far more daunting.

Though Harris, as vice president, will preside over the count of electoral votes, with a GOP House majority and Johnson as speaker, the Republican would very likely lead the charge to upend the process. This could occur in multiple ways, even though the speaker does not have any direct role in the administration of certification proceedings.

Advertisement

With decades of experience as a constitutional lawyer under his belt, Johnson can use his influence and power to rally fellow Republican lawmakers to coalesce around litigation challenging anything from the results of the election to rules that govern procedures for certification.

Johnson could raise a legal challenge over the constitutionality of the newly implemented Electoral Count Reform Act, or ECRA, for example. This legislation passed along bipartisan lines in 2022 and revamped the Electoral Count Act of 1887, a law that gave the nation its framework for the casting and counting of Electoral College votes.

The original law was ambiguously written. It left questions around the role a vice president plays during the joint certification session and the process by which state officials ascertain and certify results from their state.

Before 2022, the Electoral Count Act allowed objections to a state’s electoral vote so long as the objection was submitted in writing and had the signatures of one senator and one representative from the House. Today, the ECRA demands a much higher standard for objections during the count: Now, one-fifth of the House and one-fifth of the Senate must agree to make the objection, and each chamber must still be able to sustain its objections with a majority vote.

The 1887 version of the law was what Trump ally and attorney John Eastman cited when making specious claims in 2020 and January 2021 that then-Vice President Mike Pence had unilateral authority to accept phony pro-Trump electoral slates presented to Congress.

Advertisement

ECRA reduced the risk of this interpretation.

While the 12th Amendment guides the vice president to open all certificates and preserve order at proceedings, ECRA clarified that this means the vice president does not have the authority to determine, accept, reject or resolve disputes over things like the validity of electors’ votes or the list of electors presented to Congress.

What constituted a “failed” election wasn’t clear under the law before ECRA, either. “Failure” could simply mean the presence of a dispute over how an election was conducted. The old version of the law wasn’t clear about whether claims of voter fraud met this exception, for example. Today’s version of ECRA states that voter fraud is not included as an exception.

Representatives testify during a House Rules Committee hearing to discuss the Presidential Election Reform Act at the U.S. Capitol on Sept. 20, 2022. The legislation, proposed by Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) and Rep. Zoe Lofgren (D-Calif.), aimed to prevent future presidents from trying to overturn election results through Congress and made reforms to the Electoral Count Act. Drew Angerer via Getty Images

The new ground rules also say that states cannot appoint electors after Election Day, except if the state’s election was shuttered due to “force majeure events” or “extraordinary and catastrophic” events.

Today, state governors are also required to certify electors no less than 6 days before the meeting of the Electoral College on Dec. 17, and Congress is now obligated to treat governors’ certifications as conclusive unless a court rules that they can be changed or replaced.

Advertisement

Before 2022, the law was vague about the role courts could play to settle conflicts over electors. Now the law states that challenges to a state’s appointment of electors must be heard quickly by a three-judge panel composed of a district court judge and two circuit court judges. Direct appeals to the Supreme Court are also allowed. According to ECRA, if Supreme Court justices agree to consider a petition to challenge electors, they must rule “on an expedited basis” and issue an order before the electors actually meet.

Adav Noti, executive director of the Campaign Legal Center, told HuffPost in an interview this month that he believes any challenges to the count would fail because “the certification system is quite strong” and the “overall legal framework is prepared for that sort of attempted interference now.”

“Even in 2020 when it was the first time the system had really experienced this kind of attack through litigation, the courts did fine. State courts and federal courts handled everything quickly and reached the right results and didn’t let issues linger. We’ve had four years to strengthen and improve the process since then. I don’t think frivolous litigation will succeed,” Noti said.

In a recent interview, David Gans, director of the Constitutional Accountability Center’s human rights, civil rights and citizenship program, acknowledged that the potential for obstacles is great in this election, especially “hostility toward certification” at the state level.

But he remains optimistic about the precedents the courts have set. In West Virginia, he noted, Republican legislators tried to advance a resolution declaring the state would not recognize an “illegitimate presidential election,” and the resolution failed.

Advertisement

The federal watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington has pointed out that since 2020, there have been over 30 rogue local officials who have refused to certify election results, but so far, all have been stopped by the courts.

“We’ve created a road map in federal law and affirmed that the selection of electors and the choice of the next president has to be based on the laws chosen before Election Day. After-the-fact machinations are out of the question,” Gans said.

An Obligation To Fulfill

A spokesperson for Johnson provided HuffPost a list of remarks the speaker gave to other media outlets in recent weeks saying that “if” the election was fair, he would uphold his oath to the Constitution. The prepared blurbs also featured Johnson lamenting the treatment Trump has received from the press or criticizing “rhetoric” from critics that Trump, specifically, is a “threat to democracy.”

Rep. Jamie Raskin, (D-Md.), is familiar with casting objections: He lodged one during the 2017 certification after claiming that electors from Florida did not follow the law because state legislators are not allowed to be electors, too.

Then-Vice President Joe Biden heard the objection, and it was ultimately gaveled down.

Raskin, a constitutional scholar and former law professor at the American University Washington College of Law, said there was a clear distinction between objections in years past and what happened in 2021.

Advertisement

“Sixty federal and state courts and judges, including eight nominated to the bench by Trump, rejected every claim of electoral corruption and fraud they advanced in 2020,” Raskin told HuffPost. “And yet they still tried to block the receipt of Electoral College votes from Wisconsin, Michigan, Arizona, Pennsylvania and numerous other states.”

Lodging objections are a “bipartisan tradition,” Raskin said, but no Democrat in 2017 nor any year before “engaged in fraud or violence to try and overthrow a presidential election,” he said.

“It’s just fantasy and deception to conflate the two,” Raskin remarked.

The Jan. 6, 2025, certification will be unlike any before it. For the first time in the nation’s history, the counting of the electoral votes has been designated a national security event by the U.S. Secret Service.

With that knowledge, Raskin considered what would happen if there are attempts to lawlessly obstruct the election certification in January. He was emphatic: The effort won’t be coming from Democrats. Democrats will certify the election results and follow the Constitution.

“We have always stood by the Constitution and rule of law adhering to the results of presidential elections. We have never used fraud, corruption, deceit or violence to try and overthrow a presidential election result. We will continue to stand by the Constitution,” he said.

Advertisement

“Political scientists tell us, it’s a hallmark characteristic of an authoritarian political party that they don’t accept the results of democratic elections that don’t go their way. And authoritarian parties embrace or refuse to disavow political violence as an instrument for obtaining political power,” he said. “There’s one party in America that has set itself against the constitutional order.”

It is “very tough” to write laws to stop political parties that refuse to accept election results, Raskin said. But he is still confident that the vast majority of the American public stands by the Constitution, the rule of law and democratic processes.
SOUTHEAST WISCONSIN — Flanked by several leaders of the 13 building trades unions whose members are constructing a massive artificial intelligence data center in a rural area south of Milwaukee, Mitch Landrieu, the co-chair of Vice President Kamala Harris’ presidential campaign and former White House infrastructure czar, had what looked like an easy task before him.

The hundreds of hard hat-clad union members gathered in the dining hall, now eating bagged lunches courtesy of the Harris campaign, held some of the thousands of jobs that sprang indirectly from President Joe Biden’s investments in infrastructure and his commitment to using union labor. Landrieu was there to remind them of that.

Advertisement

The soon-to-be-running data center — whose construction was commissioned by a multinational corporation that did not grant permission for a reporter to be present at the luncheon — sits next to a complex of facilities run by Chinese electronics giant Foxconn, a company whose history in Wisconsin attests to former President Donald Trump’s shortcomings as a champion of manufacturing. Despite major state and local government incentives, the company reduced its planned investment in the site from $10 billion to $672 million, and much of the facilities it has completed remain empty.

Landrieu stopped short of an explicit call to vote for Harris. But he emphasized the White House’s commitment to union labor, recalling how whenever “the word ‘jobs’ was mentioned” in meetings with Harris and Biden, they would insist on not just jobs but “high-paying union jobs.”

After that line, and again at the close of his remarks, Landrieu got at least some applause from the assembled union members.

Mitch Landrieu, who shepherded the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, emphasized that and other bill's impact to Wisconsin union members. Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images

Advertisement

But amid the din of chatter following Landrieu’s remarks, one union member got up from his table and chanted in a singsong tone, “Fuck Joe Biden!”

No one joined in. Before walking off, the worker muttered, “I don’t believe any of this bullshit.”

That outburst, however modest, illustrates the frustrating quandary facing many Democrats this election cycle: Despite all that Harris and Biden have done for unions ― tapping pro-union government officials, boosting legislation that grew union jobs ― a national Pew Research poll shows Harris on track to best former President Donald Trump among union members by just seven percentage points. That’s a worryingly low margin for the Democratic nominee among a traditionally Democratic constituency.

Worse still, two of the country’s largest unions, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters and the International Association of Fire Fighters, have declined to endorse in the presidential election, citing their members’ divided views.

Even as Harris hopes to improve on Biden’s margins with moderate Republicans and independents in the college-educated suburbs of Milwaukee, Detroit, and Philadelphia, she has little room to spare when it comes to their non-college-educated counterparts.

Voters without a college degree, whose exodus toward the Republican Party accelerated under Trump, are still more likely to vote for Democrats if they belong to a union. Biden, a native of blue-collar Scranton, Pennsylvania, won in 2020 thanks in part to an improvement in his performance with union members relative to 2016 candidate Hillary Clinton.

Advertisement

If Harris fails to match Biden’s marks with unions, it could easily cost her the presidency.

A defeat for Harris could in turn both jeopardize the gains that the labor movement has accrued in the past four years and plunge the Democratic Party into an identity crisis about its ability to win over working-class voters altogether. Biden’s pivot toward aggressively supporting organized labor, which marked a break with a business-friendly shift in the party that had held sway since Bill Clinton’s nomination, was born out of sincere policy convictions, but also of a theory that Democrats could undermine Trump’s appeal by championing workers’ rights.

Jimmy Williams, general president of the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades, address union members at a canvassing kickoff in Big Bend, Wisconsin. Daniel Marans

Paying It Forward

The heavily male, blue-collar labor unions working overtime to convince their more conservative members to vote for Harris understand that the gains they have made in the past four years, in terms of both dollars and political power, hang in the balance.

“The last four years, this union and all of our unions combined have had more influence over the federal government than at any other time in my lifetime,” Jimmy Williams, general president of the 120,000-member International Union of Painters and Allied Trades, said in an Oct. 19 speech in Big Bend, Wisconsin.

“We cannot go backwards!” he told the crowd of more than a hundred politically active union members from Wisconsin and neighboring Illinois who were set to knock on fellow members’ doors that day for the Harris campaign.

Advertisement

Williams shared how he makes his pitch for Harris: “You’re either going to be at the table or you’re going to be on the outside looking in. And for the last four years, we’ve been able to create policies that help our members.”

At the entrance of the IUPAT District Council 7 union hall, a neighbor's Trump sign is visible behind the union's signs for Harris and Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.). Daniel Marans/HuffPost

The IUPAT's District Council 7 union hall doubles as a training center for union apprentices learning how to paint, finish drywall, install glass and display signs, among other skills. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

Williams, who also introduced Landrieu at the data center construction site on Monday, was visiting the IUPAT’s District Council 7 as part of a month-long tour of swing states. He’s been road-tripping in a van wrapped in the IUPAT’s black-and-yellow colors and decorated with its slogan: “One union, one family, one fight!”

District Council 7 has 2,000 members across Wisconsin and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula, including commercial and industrial painters, drywall finishers, glaziers, sign and display installers, and paint makers. The large Harris and Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) campaign signs at the entrance of the council office, which doubles as a massive training facility for trades apprentices, make the facility stick out alongside its neighbors. Visitors arriving at the union hall after descending I-43 from Milwaukee must pass a row of properties festooned with pro-Trump signs and flags before reaching this Democratic outpost.

Advertisement

Leaving from the union hall, Williams, a fourth-generation IUPAT member from outside Philadelphia, got in a van to knock on members’ doors in southwestern Waukesha County and northeastern Jefferson County. He recounted why he thinks many unions are so committed to Harris’ campaign, even as they struggle to get some of their rank-and-file members on board.

IUPAT General President Jimmy Williams has been touring swing states in a van to rally union members behind Harris and other Democratic candidates. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

Williams, right, and Jennipher Neduzak, communications director for IUPAT District Council 7, approach the home of union members with a Donald Trump sign on their lawn. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

When Biden got into office, it finally felt like Democrats were returning to their pre-1980s roots as a firmly pro-labor party, according to Williams. Biden has shown solidarity with organized labor through his bully pulpit — he became the first president to walk a picket line when he joined striking United Auto Workers members in Michigan in Sept. 2023 — and through his picks for federal agencies.

He appointed Marty Walsh, a former building trades union leader, as his first secretary of labor. Jennifer Abruzzo, Biden’s appointee as general counsel to the National Labor Relations Board, has used new tools to punish union-busting employers and protect workers trying to organize. Under Abruzzo and the NLRB’s other pro-union officials, the success rate of union recognition elections has gone up significantly, prompting a historic surge in petitions for such elections.

Advertisement

Biden’s legislative priorities have been even more important to cementing his legacy as a champion of organized labor. He oversaw the inclusion of upwards of $65 billion into the American Rescue Plan Act to bail out the troubled pension funds of more than 1 million union members. Then he passed a series of union-friendly public investment bills — the bipartisan infrastructure law, the CHIPS and Science Act, and the Inflation Reduction Act — that spurred a union jobs bonanza, especially for the building trades.

The IUPAT alone has seen its membership grow by 3,500 people, bringing it to the highest level since before the 2008 financial crisis, when the union had 140,000 active members, according to Williams.

Backing Harris, who kicked off a national abortion rights tour at the DC 7 facility in January, was not a hard choice, Williams said.

“How could you not support the person who was with him the most on all these issues that have been great for our members and great for our union?”

Explaining The Disconnect

To Williams, Harris and Biden’s embrace of union priorities is all the more important because it follows the more business-friendly Obama and Clinton administrations, when organized labor often had to settle for table scraps. He winced at the memory of Barack Obama shelving the Employee Free Choice Act, a bill to make union organizing easier, early on in his presidency.

Advertisement

One reason union members might still be skeptical of Democrats, despite what Biden and Harris have done, is because of those decades of accumulated distrust, Williams argued.

“It was like the choice of the lesser of two evils when it came to union membership, the working-class issues that the union movement values,” Williams said of the pre-Biden era.

Democrats “never did anything, and that’s part of the reason why we’re playing an uphill battle right now politically with our members. They know that. They felt it,” he added. “I personally believe that part of Trump’s ability to cut into the working class is because the Democratic Party really never delivered for working people for two generations.”

Other labor movement veterans had different theories about working-class people’s motivations for voting Republican.

Williams, left, and Jeff Mehrhoff, business manager for IUPAT District Council 7, walk back to the van after knocking on a member's door. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

Advertisement

“A lot of it is misogynistic — she’s a woman,” said Jeff Mehrhoff, the business manager for IUPAT DC 7, who went door-knocking with Williams. “And let’s be real: Wisconsin is a pretty white state — a lot of old white people here — and it’s race. I hate to say it, but I think it’s pretty true.”

Mike Mikus, a Pittsburgh-based Democratic strategist who works closely with unions, wishes the Biden administration had done a better job promoting its achievements for workers earlier and more consistently. “It’s almost like Democrats don’t want to brag about anything,” he said.

And Williams maintains that the Harris campaign’s message about middle-class tax cuts and various targeted loans for small businesses and first-time home buyers don’t resonate as much with his members, who are concerned about decent jobs first and foremost.

“You’ve got to get to the core group of what the American working class really needs, which is security — retirement security, health care security,” he said. “All the things that we represent have to be at the center of what her economic message is from today.”

He also acknowledged his concern that Harris’ courtship of the business community, as embodied by the hearty endorsement of billionaire Mark Cuban, among others, might signal a reversion to the Democratic Party mean. “It’s a nod back to what the Democratic Party was before Biden,” he said.

Advertisement

Diminished Influence

In addition to highlighting Biden and Harris’ achievements for union members, organized labor is warning its members about Project 2025, a governing blueprint for Trump’s second term drafted by the right-wing Heritage Foundation.

The think tank’s labor policy recommendations include doing away with a law requiring construction companies contracting with the federal government to pay the “prevailing wage,” and adopting a law allowing employers to grant limited time off in lieu of time-and-a-half overtime pay.

“Trump says, ‘No tax on overtime.’ You know, he’ll keep that promise. A lot of our members think that’s a good thing,” Dan Bukiewicz, president of the Miwaukee Building & Construction Trades Council, said at Saturday’s canvassing kickoff.

“Can I tell you what? You ain’t going to have any overtime. You’re going to be all working for straight time, regardless of the day or how many hours you are there. Just plain and simple, it’s easy not to tax it when it doesn’t exist and will go away.”

Trump has sought to distance himself from Project 2025, but his ties to its architects run deep.

And during Trump’s last term, he demonstrated little willingness to break with free-market conservative dogma outside of trade and immigration policy. Trump’s Department of Labor, in particular, was as anti-union as they come. Among other steps, his administration undid Obama’s expansion of overtime eligibility and tried, unsuccessfully, to strip building trades unions of their monopoly on federally-recognized apprenticeship programs.

Advertisement

IUPAT and other building trades members from Wisconsin and Illinois pose for a group photo with Williams, Mehrhoff, and Stephanie Bloomingdale, president of the Wisconsin AFL-CIO. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

But the union officials who riled up the crowd of canvassers on Saturday were speaking to members who are already committed political volunteers.

The broader membership of the individual building trades unions is naturally much more varied in its views — and less acquainted with union leaders’ ways of looking at politics.

Sure enough, the IUPAT members at the data center construction site who expressed ambivalence about Harris cited something unrelated to unions: the inflation that had eroded their earnings in recent years. Food prices in particular went up nearly 26% from Nov. 2020 to March 2024.

While inflation has been a global problem since the end of the COVID-19 pandemic and most experts believe Biden’s policies have had only a marginal impact, voters often blame the party in power for economic troubles that occur on their watch, regardless of their underlying causes.

Advertisement

Hunter Proft, an undecided first-year IUPAT apprentice who has never voted before, does not think Trump is being entirely honest when he lays the blame for inflation at Biden’s feet. But his own experience with inflation still made him receptive to the Republican nominee’s pitch.

“The four years [Trump] was in office, I didn’t really see much change in my lifestyle,” Proft said. “Since [Biden] was president, I’ve felt a decline in me being able to support my family and stuff.”

Alesha Smith, another first-year IUPAT apprentice from Racine who voted for Biden in 2020, likes Harris and her proposals, but isn’t sure if she can trust her to follow through.

“Inflation and everything go up — it’s harder to just find simple things than it should be,” Smith said. “She had the power to change some stuff while she was there. She hasn’t.”

Alesha Smith, a first-year IUPAT apprentice from Racine, Wisconsin, voted for Joe Biden in 2020, but is still undecided this year. The photo is blurry because HuffPost did not have permission to portray the construction site. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

Advertisement

Outside the PPG Industries paint coating factory in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, IUPAT members who said they were backing Harris often first invoked Trump’s character and authoritarian tendencies, rather than his labor policies, to explain their aversion to him.

“One’s a liar and he’s going to do what he wants to do. The other one, she hasn’t done much,” said Rudy Villalobos, a Franklin resident and veteran of the U.S. Marines. “I’ll still vote for her, because Trump said he wants to be a dictator.”

Asked whether the union’s endorsement of Harris made a difference, Villalobos said, “The Trump people, they’re not union. They don’t care about the middle class or the lower class at all.”

Villalobos’ ex-wife and daughter are supporting Trump, however, because of their belief he’d be better for small businesses.

One Trump voter leaving the PPG plant, who refused to provide his name because “liberals are crazy,” said that while he is a committed union member, even paying dues in a state where he’s allowed to opt out of them, he has always ignored union leaders’ political advice.

Advertisement

“I don’t pay it no mind,” said the Glendale resident. “They always support the Democrats. I don’t know why.”

He said he’s backing Trump because he believes excessive immigration is “lowering our wages.”

The same labor unions that were once so influential they could deliver entire states to Democrats — from West Virginia to Michigan — on the strength of their membership alone now have neither those decisive numbers nor as much sway over their remaining members.

Prior to the country’s anti-labor turn in the late 1970s, unions played a more central role in not just the economy and politics but in working-class social and cultural life, anchoring the drinking clubs and charitable organizations in industrial towns. Members at that time might also have personal memories of a more precarious life before the New Deal, when the federal government extended its protective might to the labor movement, prompting the country’s first — and only — Golden Age for organized labor.

But in an era where unions must compete for attention with the likes of megachurches and social media influencers, union members are more apt to see their relationship to the union through a transactional lens — union dues for higher pay and benefits, politics be damned.

What’s more, while unions’ influence has slowed the drift of their non-college-educated, white male members to the right, no American is immune to the effects of political and demographic polarization. And aside from law enforcement unions, members of the building trades unions — which are overwhelmingly male and largely white — are typically among the labor movement’s most conservative members. A number of lunch boxes at the data center job site were plastered with National Rifle Association stickers, for example.

Advertisement

“They’re all the demographic that votes for Trump,” Mikus said.

These building trades union members’ conservatism, in turn, sometimes feeds a cycle where union leaders take a less aggressive approach to political education for fear of alienating the members who elect them to their posts.

“If you’re in a local with two-thirds of your members that don’t agree with your endorsement, it’s going to be difficult for you to stand out there on a ledge,” Williams said. “This is how I say it to members: ‘You pay me to tell you the truth in regards to labor policies, that’s my job. You don’t have to listen to me. You don’t have to agree with me.’”

Williams, the IUPAT general president, takes a smoke break between canvassing stops. He goes through about one pack of American Spirit cigarettes a day. Daniel Marans/HuffPost

A Path Forward

IUPAT is widely considered the most progressive of the building trades unions. The group connects its members’ interests to other social causes, including by marching with the Black Lives Matter movement in 2020 and commemorating the Juneteenth holiday. It was the first building trades union to elect a Black leader, former general president Kenneth Rigmaiden. The union has set a long-term goal to have 20% of its members be women, and has begun recruiting heavily among Black and Latino workers, who had not always been welcome.

Regardless of the election’s outcome though, Williams is committed to communicating with members more regularly about how the IUPAT fits into the broader sweep of labor history and the ways in which political choices, however remote they may feel, affect members’ lives.

Advertisement
New Tripoli, Pennsylvania CNN —

Michael Pesce is conservative in the truest sense of the word.

He speaks with an economy of words. He holds himself to a high standard but prefers not to judge others. He gets through tasks methodically, wasting no time or energy – even when enjoying his hobbies.

Pesce is a hunter, and Pennsylvania deer season overlaps with election season. Archery hunting is open now, with a rifle hunting period set to open in November. So Pesce stopped by the ranges at a state park recently to check his gear.

“Hunting season is starting,” Pesce said. “That’s more important than any election for a lot of people.”

First, several shots at the archery targets, where Pesce at one point used a dime to adjust his bow sight. Once satisfied, it was down to the nearby firearm area. Pesce set his target 100 yards down range, and set his .30-6 hunting rifle on its stand.

A few stalls down, two men were firing AR-15-style assault rifles. Dozens of shots, the empty shells piling up at their feet. Pesce quietly made note of how loud it was, then got about his business: just three shots to adjust his rifle scope, then two more to allow a visitor to test his aim and get a feel for the rifle.

Then time to pack up, taking even the empty shells Pesce recycles for new bullets. A Coast Guard veteran. A Reagan Republican. A Nikki Haley voter in the April GOP primary who will be a Kamala Harris voter a week from Tuesday.

Pesce’s conservative principles tell him he can never vote for Donald Trump. And they tell him he has to vote for Harris, to try to keep Trump out of the White House, even though Pesce doesn’t like surprises and does not believe the vice president has clearly laid out a governing vision.

“That’s the scary part,” Pesce said. “I am not voting for a candidate. I’m not voting for a policy. I’m voting against a candidate and policies, and not even all the policies. Just, you know, the unstableness. Some of the things he says are truly scary.”

Pesce is part of our All Over The Map project, an effort to track the 2024 campaign through the eyes and experiences of voters who live in key battlegrounds and are part of potentially decisive voting blocs.

Michael Pesce at a shooting range in New Tripoli, Pennsylvania. CNN

In Pesce’s case, he’s one of the Republicans in the counties that surround Philadelphia who supported Haley in the primary even though the former South Carolina governor had exited the race weeks before. They’re voters who view Trump as anything but conservative or principled. In many cases, they believe Trump must be defeated again to shake their party out of his spell.

“If Trump loses, then I think Republicans will start coming back to what they were,” Pesce said. “Because they won’t have that radical right side. They won’t have the craziness and instability.”

It was our third visit in five months, and Pesce, true to his conservatism, has been consistent: He said in May he would vote for President Joe Biden even as he raised concerns about his age and took issue with some of his agenda. In conversations since the switch to Harris at the top of the Democratic ticket, Pesce has made clear he sees a duty to try to block Trump.

He recently traveled West through several states that are reliably Republican. Turning on the TV or the radio was different. He returned to Pennsylvania even more mindful that he lives in the biggest of the presidential battleground prizes.

“No one’s ever been through anything like this,” he said of the 2024 campaign. “Is this an election for Americans, or is this for those seven states?”

It is important to remember our project is anecdotal reporting; the voters we are tracking, in this case Haley primary supporters, are not necessarily representative of the full universe of such voters. Yet they still provide us with valuable and sometimes telling insights. And they live in places that will be critical to the final math of who wins Pennsylvania’s 19 electoral votes.

This time, we met Pesce at a state range in New Tripoli, which is in blue-collar Lehigh County. He lives a few miles away in Bucks County, which in recent elections has been the most competitive of the suburban collar counties that surround Philadelphia.

Those collar counties represent one of the crucial 2024 math tests: Can Harris hold or build on Biden’s 2020 suburban strength or will Trump claw back at least to his 2016 performance, when he lost the Philadelphia suburbs but by a smaller margin than in 2020? In a state so competitive, tiny shifts can make the difference.

‘American first, conservative second and Republican third’

Joan London and Berks County offer another glimpse at the battlegrounds within the battlegrounds.

Berks is still red when you look at election maps, and it is too far out to be considered a Philadelphia suburb. But as the suburbs grow and change, often the exurbs do, too. Still farmland, but more given up to homes and services. Still plenty of Trump signs, but in some pockets surprising competition.

“This neighborhood is becoming a lot like the Philadelphia suburbs,” said London, an attorney who was born closer to Philly, in Montgomery County. “This is a primarily Republican leaning borough, always has been. But when it comes to national elections, I do see more and more support for Democratic candidates.”

A walk down London’s leafy street in Wyomissing proves her point. No Trump signs but Harris signs on several of the lawns on her block.

Not her house. London’s lawn has one sign supporting a Republican legislative candidate.

But London is voting for Harris – the first time she will vote Democrat for president.

“Sometimes you have to say American first, conservative second and Republican third,” London said.

Pennsylvania voter Joan London talks with John King in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania. CNN

Her decision is a shift from when we first met in May. Then, London told us she voted in the GOP primary for Haley but then switched her registration to independent because she opposes Trump and what she sees as his dangerous populism.

But back then she said she would write in a conservative because she could not support Biden. She was even more firm in that belief just after Harris took over the ticket because she views the vice president as more liberal than Biden.

She had settled on Pat Toomey, a conservative former senator from Pennsylvania, as her write-in choice. Then she watched the Trump-Harris debate, and it stirred why, back at the age of 18, she chose to be a Reagan Republican.

“The last straw was what he said about the Ukraine,” London said. “When he said we have to have a negotiated settlement. … For someone who claims to be a conservative to say that was, in my opinion, outrageous. It’s appeasement. It’s dangerous.”

She slept on what that debate answer stirred in her. And she awoke a Harris voter because, like Pesce, she believes the only way to get her party back is for Trump to be defeated.

“I needed to vote against allowing him to become president again,” London said. She knows the polling in Pennsylvania and other swing states is tight and that Trump could well win.

“I don’t want it on my conscience that I contributed in some way to that,” London said.

London is reluctant to speak for others but believes she may have company among at least some fellow local conservatives.

“I was surprised by how many people came up to me and kind of whispered, ‘I feel the same way as you do,’” she said. “So I have a feeling there are quite a few private conversations that are occurring behind the scenes in Republican and conservative circles.”

It could matter if London has company. Hillary Clinton lost Berks County by 18,189 votes. Biden lost it, too, but by a slightly smaller margin: 16,841.

That 1,348 vote difference seems tiny, maybe insignificant, when you note that Pennsylvania has more than 9 million registered voters.

But ‘every vote counts’ is not a cliché in the battlegrounds: Trump’s winning margin here in 2016 was just 44,292; Biden’s in 2020 was 81,660.

Never Trump, but not yet Harris

Cynthia Sabatini is another Haley voter who now factors into the battleground math.

She lives in Media, in suburban Delaware County.

Sabatini is a registered Republican but she has never voted for Trump. And she says she never will.

“Trump is a non starter for me,” she said in a recent interview at home.

But she is not sold on Harris, either, and her questions track what we hear from a lot of voters in our travels, even committed supporters of the vice president.

“I don’t know who she is,” Sabatini said. “I really don’t. Because she had different positions than she does now. But she continues to say they are within her value system. So connect the dots for me.”

What can Harris do to win her vote in these final days?

“You need to answer questions on point,” Sabatini said. “You need to provide more details about your economic plan. You need to provide more details about your vision for this country.”

Cynthia Sabatini meditates with John King in Media, Pennsylvania. CNN

Sabatini wrote in a Republican senator in 2016 when Trump won Pennsylvania. She voted for Biden in 2020. She is well aware of the 2024 math, and friends voting for Harris aren’t shy about reminding her how critical it is for the vice president to get big margins in the suburbs.

“I don’t care what they personally think about that,” Sabatini said. “I don’t want to be forced into making a decision between one of the two.”

She meditates frequently, sometimes twice a day, and says it can clear the mind for tough choices.

As she ponders hers, she shares this: “I think Trump is going to win.” That, she said, is based on betting lines, not the polls.

Sabatini does not want Trump back in the White House. She has a mail-in ballot and plans to drop it off on Election Day. Her decision could come as late as that morning.

She will make it according to her beliefs: Either Harris will win her over or she will cast another write in, with Haley her leading choice if it comes to that.

“The lion’s share of my friends are Democrats,” she said. “They think at the 11th hour people will have such reservations about Trump that it will cause them to vote for Harris. I don’t see it that way.”
At a Wednesday rally for Donald Trump in Duluth, Georgia, disgraced former Fox News host Tucker Carlson showed up in the guise of an emcee from a psychosexual nightmare realm.

After describing the American public as “a 2-year-old smearing the contents of his diapers on the wall” and “a hormone-addled 15-year-old girl slamming the door and giving you the finger,” a red-faced Carlson proposed a solution. “There has to be a point at which Dad comes home,” he said, to full-throated cheers from the crowd. “Dad comes home and he’s pissed. He’s not vengeful, he loves his children. Disobedient as they may be, he loves them, because they’re his children. … And when Dad gets home, you know what he says? You’ve been a bad girl. You’ve been a bad little girl and you’re getting a vigorous spanking right now. And no, it’s not going to hurt me more than it hurts you. No, it’s not. I’m not going to lie. It’s going to hurt you a lot more than it hurts me. And you earned this. You’re getting a vigorous spanking because you’ve been a bad girl, and it has to be this way.”

And when Dad gets home, you know what he says? You’ve been a bad little girl, and you’re getting a vigorous spanking right now. TUCKER CARLSON AT A TRUMP RALLY IN DULUTH, GA

The crowd went wild. And when Donald Trump came to the stage, it greeted him with rapturous cries of “Daddy’s home.” This segment of the nation, it seems, is eager for a spanking. Or at least titillated at the prospect of pain inflicted on others. This is not a new phenomenon within the MAGA movement, which has always been keen on the pain of those it deems wayward — but it is a florid illustration of the way patriarchal family dynamics and punishment stand at the center of contemporary right-wing morality.

Carlson, of course, is hardly the first person to conceptualize the nation as a family, although he may be the first to engage in a blissed-out ode to spanking on C-SPAN. George Lakoff, linguist and philosopher, posited that conservative ideologies rely on a “strict father” metaphor to conceptualize the nation and how it should be ruled. In his 2006 book “Thinking Points,” Lakoff explained that in this model, “The strict father is the moral authority in the family; he knows right from wrong, is inherently moral, and heads the household. ... Obedience to the father is moral; disobedience is immoral. ... When children disobey, the father is obligated to punish, providing an incentive to avoid punishment.”

Authoritarian conservatives, Lakoff argues, apply the strict-father model “not just to all issues but to governing itself.” In this vision, the state and its leader adopts both absolute control and the moral necessity to punish.

But Carlson’s words might have had a special resonance for a particular breed of authoritarian conservative: members of the evangelical right, who have been Trump’s most loyal foot soldiers; 77% of white evangelical protestants voted for Trump in 2016, and 85% did in 2020. Carlson — a maestro at knowingly appealing to the far-right masses — utilized a skin-crawling, sexualized misogyny in the culmination of his metaphor. But his central appeal to an angry father was consonant with a 50-year movement on the Christian right, one in which tens of millions of Americans have experienced, firsthand, the consequences of disobeying Daddy.

In the 1970s, in response to the student-led social revolutions of the 1960s — civil rights, feminism and gay rights — a newly awakened religious right created a movement designed to quash the impulses of rebellious youth. It was called “biblical parenting.” Its first megahit was James Dobson’s incredibly cruel book “Dare to Discipline,” which instructed parents, in great detail, to take a “rod of correction”-centric approach to child rearing. Dobson, founder of the evangelical institution Focus on the Family, recommends regularly spanking children from the ages of 18 months to 10 years old, with a spanking “of sufficient magnitude to cause tears.” This will efficiently quash “willful, haughty disobedience.”

Published in 1970, the book quickly sold millions of copies and launched a movement that centered God, and the rod, in child rearing. It’s a movement that has endured in millions of households across America, and across generations — leading to a new cadre of people, like the baying crowd in Duluth, for whom authoritarian principles were first nurtured in the home.

For my recently released book, “Wild Faith: How the Christian Right is Taking Over America,” I reviewed 50 years’ worth of evangelical parenting manuals, from 1970 to 2017, and conducted interviews with nearly 150 former evangelicals who were raised according to “biblical parenting” principles. Evangelicals also evince a consistently higher approval toward corporal punishment in polling than other groups, a case of successful propaganda enforced with paddles, switches, sticks and hands. The through line throughout decades of these parenting manuals, and in testimonies, was an emphasis on corporal punishment, sometimes brutal, in order to enforce, in the words of youth-centered ministry Youth With a Mission, “instant, joyful obedience.”

In this family model, the strict father isn’t just the moral core of the household; he is also its spiritual head, with the mother as a submissive co-enforcer. Obedience to parents, according to these texts, is both a necessary prelude for and expression of obedience to God. The stakes are existentially high: One frequently cited verse is Proverbs 23:13 — “Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.” This system coerces parents into using physical violence on their children in order to save their souls. And in an extension of Lakoff’s “strict father” model of the nation, this model of the family, predicated on obedience enforced with physical violence, creates an authoritarian politics in its practitioners.

The best way to rebuke authoritarianism is to not just rebuke it, but to defeat it and make it look ridiculous and weak.

Consider that a child who has been systemically beaten in the name of God since toddlerhood grows up to be accustomed to brutality and to exhibiting instant and joyful obedience to authority no matter how capricious or unjust. Someone who empathizes with the aggressor to survive, and is inured to brutality by repeatedly being subjected to it. When you ask what might motivate a crowd of people to cheer on the idea of a national spanking — to picture, with approval, a nation submitting to punishment by an abusive father as just and righteous, a necessary corrective to disobedience — you might not have to look any further than the kitchen tables they were raised around as kids, where wooden spoons were broken on their backs.

The best way to rebuke authoritarianism, to break the tyranny of the strict father, is to not just rebuke it, but to defeat it and make it look ridiculous and weak. Mockery and defeat undoes the authoritarian more effectively than violence. When a system is predicated on a cartoonish hypermasculinity, the solution is to treat its leaders as deserving of ridicule, not fear. And until voting ends next month, we have the chance to do just that. To disobey, with glee and en masse, the edict of this punitive would-be father. He’s not our dad. He’s just a man on a mission of punishment, and we can — and must — deny him that chance.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. (AP) — Many of Donald Trump’s supporters left a Michigan rally before he arrived after the former president kept them waiting for three hours to tape a popular podcast interview.

Those who remained at the outdoor rally on an airport tarmac huddled in the cold Friday night as they waited for the former president to touch down in the battleground state.

Advertisement

Trump apologized to the crowd for the delay, which he blamed on an interview with Joe Rogan, the nation’s most listened-to podcaster and an influential voice with younger male voters Trump is aggressively courting.

The interview, taped in Austin, Texas, was released Friday night and ran a whopping three hours, with Trump telling many familiar stories from his rallies and other interviews but also engaging with Rogan on topics like the existence of UFOs.

Democrat Kamala Harris was also in Texas Friday for an appearance with superstar Beyoncé in Houston at an event highlighting the conservative state’s abortion ban, which was enacted after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. Three of the justices who voted to overturn Roe were nominated by Trump.

TRAVERSE CITY, MICHIGAN - OCTOBER 25: Republican presidential nominee, former U.S. President Donald Trump, arrives for a campaign rally at Avflight at Cherry Capital Airport on October 25, 2024 in Traverse City, Michigan. Trump is scheduled to hold rallies in Michigan and Pennsylvania on Saturday before closing out the weekend with a rally on Sunday at New York’s Madison Square Garden. (Photo by Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images) Anna Moneymaker via Getty Images

Advertisement

Minutes before Trump’s Michigan rally was scheduled to begin at 7:30 p.m. Eastern, his spokesman posted on the social media platform X that Trump was just leaving Texas, more than two hours away by air. Trump recorded a video from his plane urging his supporters to stay, noting it was Friday night and promising, “We’re going to have a good time tonight.”

Trump eventually took the stage at the Traverse City airport, where temperatures dipped to about 50 degrees Fahrenheit (10 degrees Celsius). The crowd erupted into cheers as video screens showed Trump’s plane arriving and then him walking off his plane and down the steps.

“I am so sorry,” he said. “We got so tied up, and I figured you wouldn’t mind too much because we’re trying to win.”

Attendees who hadn’t left bundled up, some covered by blankets, as they waited for him to land. The crowd sounded and looked disengaged as North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum and former Republican gubernatorial candidate Tudor Dixon tried to kill time onstage. Hats were thrown to attendees.

Among those who stuck around at Trump’s rally were John and Cheryl Sowash, who live in Traverse City, and arrived at the airport at 4 p.m.

Advertisement

“Things happen,” said John. “He spoke to a lot more people talking to Joe Rogan than he did here.”

Indeed, Cheryl said she was worried about Trump, who had missed speaking to a larger crowd.

“He’s gonna be disappointed, because there were twice as many people here. He missed it,” she said.

Rogan interview underscores Trump’s focus on masculinity

His interview with Rogan created another opportunity for the Republican nominee to highlight the hypermasculine tone that has defined much of his 2024 White House bid. Trump has made masculinity a central theme of his campaign, appearing on podcasts targeting young male voters and tapping surrogates who sometimes use crude language.

Throughout the lengthy conversation, Trump told familiar stories but occasionally dropped new color and nuance.

Rogan pressed Trump on whether he’s “completely committed” to bringing Robert F. Kennedy Jr. into his administration.

“Oh, I completely am,” Trump responded, but added he and Kennedy disagree on environmental policies. He said he’ll tell Kennedy to “focus on health, do whatever you want.”

Kennedy has been instrumental in spreading skepticism about vaccines, rejecting the overwhelming consensus among scientists that the benefits of inoculation outweigh the rare risk of side effects.

Advertisement

Trump again seemed to entertain the idea of eliminating federal income taxes, telling Rogan, “Yeah, sure why not?” when asked by the podcast host if he was serious about it.

He also repeated at length his grievances about the 2020 election but said, “If I win, this will be my last election.”

Trump said he’s “never been a believer” in theories about extraterrestrial life visiting Earth. He said he is asked constantly about what the U.S. government knows about “the people coming from space.” He said as president he was told “a lot” but he dodged Rogan’s entreaties to discuss alien life in detail.

And he criticized federal subsidies aiming to significantly boost U.S. semiconductor manufacturing, one of President Joe Biden’s signature achievements. Chipmakers have credited the legislation for enabling billions of dollars in new factories, including in battleground state Arizona.

He also ripped Taiwan, the self-governing island democracy that has long been aligned with the U.S.

“You know, Taiwan, they stole our chip business,” Trump told Rogan. “OK. They want us to protect and they want protection. They don’t pay us money for the protection, you know? The mob makes you pay money, right?”

Advertisement

Trump called Chinese President Xi Jinping, whose Beijing government considers Taiwan a breakaway province, a “brilliant guy, whether you like it or not.”

The podcaster is known for his hours-long interviews on “The Joe Rogan Experience,” which is listed as No. 1 in the United States, according to Spotify’s charts. He calls women “chicks” and once laughed as a comedian friend described repeatedly coercing young female comics into sex.

Rogan and Trump have a complicated relationship. Rogan had previously said that he declined to host Trump on his podcast before because he did not want to help him.

Earlier this year, Trump criticized Rogan after the podcaster said that Kennedy, then a candidate, was the only person running for president who made sense to him. Kennedy has since suspended his bid, endorsed Trump and joined him on the campaign trail.

Trump mocks Harris’ rally with Beyoncé and drives immigration message

In Michigan and at an earlier press conference in Texas, Trump repeatedly mocked his opponent’s rally in Houston. “Kamala is at a dance party with Beyoncé,” he told the Michigan crowd.

Advertisement

He used his trip to Texas, his second stop in a border state in two days, to escalate his already dark and apocalyptic rhetoric against illegal immigration.

“We’re like a garbage can for the rest of the world to dump the people that they don’t want,” Trump told supporters Friday in Austin. Trump has continued to push the unfounded idea that foreign governments actively send criminals to the U.S.

Harris said the remark is “just another example of how he really belittles our country.”

“The president of the United States should be someone who elevates discourse and talks about the best of who we are, and invests in the best of who we are, not someone like Donald Trump, who is constantly demeaning and belittling who the American people are,” Harris told reporters in Houston before her event.

As the temperature in Michigan dropped Friday night and many in the crowd streamed out, Trump suggested that his campaign advisers have urged him not to repeat his past statements about being the “protector” of women.

The former president mimicked advice he said he was getting: “‘Sir, please don’t say you’re going to protect women.’” But he said he planned to keep saying it. “I mean, that’s our job.”

Advertisement

That too was a response of sorts to the Harris event, which was focused on protecting reproductive rights and included a string of women talking about having their health threatened by strict abortion restrictions.

Trump’s rally was also interrupted twice by audience members needing medical attention. After the second incident, Trump asked organizers to play the song Ave Maria to fill the time.

That was reminiscent of a recent Trump rally in Pennsylvania when medical attention being required in the audience caused Trump to sway to that and other songs for nearly 40 minutes.

This time, though, he continued speaking after “Ave Maria” ended.

___
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Singer Beyoncé speaks during a campaign rally for Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris in Houston, Texas, on Friday, Oct. 25, 2024. MIGUEL J. RODRIGUEZ CARRILLO/AFP via Getty Images

HOUSTON — Beyoncé took the stage in her Texas hometown Friday night with Vice President Kamala Harris, rallying against what both described as an existential threat to women’s rights in America.

“I’m not here as a celebrity. I’m not here as a politician,” the singer said at the event, which drew 30,000 attendees, according to Harris’ presidential campaign.

Advertisement

“I’m here as a mother, a mother who cares deeply about the world my children and all of our children live in, a world where we have the freedom to control our bodies, a world where we’re not divided.”

Abortion rights were the topic of the night at Harris’ rally, which packed a stadium following reports that Beyoncé might perform. The superstar didn’t sing, but she and Harris stood united on the issue of reproductive rights.

Jordan Fick, a 22-year-old graduate student originally from Louisiana, told HuffPost that her main concern in this election cycle is abortion rights. She said she is still “growing up” and knows birth control isn’t 100% effective. If she were to get pregnant, all options would be scary for her. Abortion would mean traveling out of the state, while keeping the pregnancy would mean “risking” her life to give birth in Texas.

Fick attended Friday night’s rally with her friend Rachel Dubuque, a 24-year-old graduate student. The two met through their boyfriends, who weren’t in attendance but are supportive of Fick and Dubuque’s political interests.

Advertisement

“We like to brag that we don’t have to cancel out our boyfriends’ votes,” Fick said.

Harris’ stop in Houston, just days out from the presidential election, was a unique move, considering that candidates often spend their last few days on the campaign trail in swing states. Though Texas typically votes Republican for various offices, Houston has made headlines for choosing Democrats. And when Harris walked onstage Friday in a dark purple suit, it could have been a nod to some people’s belief that Texas is not, in fact, Republican-leaning red but swing-voting purple.

One person who thought so was Anushka Bhowal, a 28-year-old Harris supporter who traveled from Dallas for the Houston rally.

“I’ve been feeling good,” Bhowal said about the election. “I think the general sentiment is that Texas is not a red state. It’s purple, and I really have just been trying to urge people to go out and vote.”

She is hopeful that a majority of Texans will vote for Harris — but if not for Harris, then at least for Democratic Rep. Colin Allred, who is seeking to unseat Republican Sen. Ted Cruz.

“I do think there’s a chance,” Bhowal said.

“It helps that he’s up against Ted Cruz,” added Bhowal’s friend, Sergio, who declined to give his last name.

Advertisement

Bhowal said being a Democrat can feel isolating in Texas, but that tens of thousands of Harris supporters showing up in Houston gave her hope. Bhowal is also optimistic that Harris will be able to restore abortion rights or at least protect the ones that exist. Pregnant people’s mortality rate in Texas has increased in recent years, something that concerns Bhowal.

Being a woman in Texas is “terrifying,” she said. And though Bhowal isn’t planning on having a baby anytime soon, she has thought about what that would look like. She said she wouldn’t feel comfortable having a baby in Texas with its near-total abortion ban, and traveling outside of the state to give birth would mean she wouldn’t have her support system nearby.

“I can’t fathom having a pregnancy and have anything go wrong, and not have a choice to do anything about it and I could have my life at risk,” she said.

Erin Riddle attended Harris’ rally with Isabella, her 14-year-old daughter. Riddle said raising a young girl amid Texas’ abortion ban is “scary.” Riddle also noted that a distant acquaintance’s 14-year-old daughter had become pregnant, forcing Riddle to consider what she would do if her family experienced a similar situation.

“It’s not an option,” Riddle said. “But in Texas, what do you do?”

For some people, the possibility of another U.S. administration led by Republican Donald Trump looms over them. It’s such a threat, they say, that they’ve begun thinking about moving out of the country.

Advertisement

Riddle’s sister lives in Toronto, so moving to Canada is on her mind, Riddle said.

“If Trump got elected, we would probably move,” she said.

Moving is also on Steven Gilbert’s mind. The 63-year-old said women’s rights and democracy are critical issues for him in this election. But if Trump wins the White House, Gilbert said he would move somewhere on the “other side of the Atlantic.”
Feeling jittery and unsettled about the upcoming election? If you’re anything like the 69 percent of American adults who said the 2024 presidential election was a “significant” source of stress in their lives, per this year’s American Psychological Association’s Stress in America poll, you’re not alone.

Elections are common wellsprings of anxiety because they’re rife with uncertainty, says David H. Rosmarin, the founder of the Center for Anxiety. You’re unsure of the outcome, and unsure of what life may look like for you under a new administration, especially when the difference between the two choices is undeniably vast. Some of the proposed policies may threaten people’s safety and freedoms, resulting in even more anxiety. Research shows political anxiety can impact people who aren’t generally anxious otherwise.

There are key differences between everyday anxiety and election-related anxiety. Sometimes, generalized anxiety is rooted in cognitive distortions, or inaccurate beliefs or fears about the world. But election-based distress isn’t necessarily based on hypotheticals or overreactions, says licensed clinical social worker Jneé Hill. “A lot of the concerns,” she says, “are very real and very valid based on people’s real lives and lived experiences.”

While election anxiety may feel large and existential, mental health experts agree it can be managed. In the lead-up to November 5 — and the uneasy days following — there are some strategies that can help quiet your mind.

Get to the root of your anxiety

To properly address your fears, you first need to specify what triggers your feelings of anxiety beyond not wanting the other side to win, Rosmarin says. What specific policies or issues impact you the most? It might be reproductive rights, the economy, immigration, or war abroad. Identify your top three issues, Rosmarin says, and try to share these worries with family, a friend, a supportive online community, or mental health professional.

Knowing the causes of your fears can help you anticipate and gird against them. Research shows when people were asked whether they expected to be stressed about the election the following day, they reported worse moods and were more likely to rate their physical health as poor, regardless of political affiliation, age, or gender.

Knowing the causes of your fears can help you anticipate and gird against them

You might also ask yourself why these issues concern you, Hill says. If reproductive rights are your top priority, maybe your deeper fears center on being unable to receive lifesaving medical treatments. “A lot of this,” Hill says, “comes down to safety.”

However, you can anticipate your stress and get in front of it. There’s a thought exercise you can do ahead of encountering something upsetting to slow your thoughts and talk yourself through your anxiety, says Shevaun Neupert, a psychology professor at North Carolina State University and author of a study on how to combat anticipatory election stress. Take a few minutes and think about why you’re stressed, how it’s related to the election, and why this contentious issue exists in the first place. “It really is focused on mental engagement, perspective-taking,” Neupert says, “trying to understand where did this thing come from? Why is it here? And to fully understand it rather than trying to solve it.”

Vox Culture Culture reflects society. Get our best explainers on everything from money to entertainment to what everyone is talking about online. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

This exercise is effective, Neupert believes, because it helps reduce uncertainty. For instance, you may come to realize a source of your anxiety is a decades-long ongoing foreign policy issue. While this realization doesn’t minimize the problem or provide a solution, sometimes it’s helpful to put the issue into its proper context and perspective. “If we feel like we have a better understanding of a problem or of a stressor or we have a clearer sense of it,” Neupert says, “it’s not as scary.”

Take control where you can

Uncertainty about the future is a major source of general anxiety and can lead to a sense of powerlessness. With so much out of an individual’s control, it’s important to focus on areas where you do have authority. You can, of course, vote, volunteer as a poll worker, and get involved with get out the vote or activist organizations in your community.

You can also try setting goals in your work or social life that have nothing to do with politics but still might help you feel like you’re making progress in some small way, Neupert says. Maybe that goal is to finish a book over the next two weeks or to make dinner every night with your family. “That goes a long way to boosting perceptions of control,” she says.

Then, consider how you’ll assert autonomy over your life after the election, especially if your candidate doesn’t win. You can plan on leaning heavily on your friends or distracting yourself with hobbies. “There might be situations that are beyond my control,” Rosmarin says, “but that doesn’t take away my power of choice in my life, in my limited way.”

Lean into community

Feeling supported by friends and family helps combat anxiety, so try to avoid spending the next few weeks in isolation. Instead, reach out to friends and family (preferably discussing anything but politics) or attend a safe and affirming community event. Find people who fill you with calm instead of dread and with whom you can talk things through and problem-solve. “What can be helpful,” clinical psychologist Krystal Lewis says, “is feeling all emotions, feeling all the feels, with people who are going through it as well.”

These communities will be especially crucial post-election, too, Lewis says. Find people or groups where you can process strong emotions, whether that’s a dance class or a volunteer organization.

Care for your mind and body

In the days leading up to the election and immediately following, especially if a clear winner is not apparent, stressed-out Americans should pay extra care to their minds and bodies. This might mean curbing your consumption of news and social media. While experts say everyone’s tolerance will be different, it’s important to pay attention to how they feel while watching or reading the news and social media. Engage enough to stay informed, but step away if you feel overwhelmed, Lewis says. “Unless that’s your job,” she says, “there’s no need to be that consumed with it.”

Rosmarin suggests turning off your phone and avoiding all news at least 30 minutes before you go to sleep, including on election night. “You’ll wake up in the morning, you’ll find out what the story is. You watching it isn’t going to change anything,” he says. “The only thing it’ll change is make you more tired and grumpy the next day.”

Engage enough to stay informed, but step away if you feel overwhelmed

Proper sleep, a healthy diet, and physical activity can ward off anxiety, so experts recommend getting enough to eat, moving a bit, and prioritizing rest. Try going for a walk or hike as exposure to nature can lower stress and anxiety levels. Grounding exercises can also help you calm down. Hill suggests deep breathing from your diaphragm or picking a color and describing objects of that color in your surroundings.

Difficult as it may be, try to incorporate joy however you can, Lewis says. Spend a few minutes each day on pleasurable activities that reduce stress, like listening to music, getting together with friends, or meditation.

Regardless of what happens over the coming days and weeks, remind yourself that your concerns are real, Hill says. What matters is finding coping strategies that work for you — and will continue to be effective no matter the outcome.
is a senior correspondent at Vox, where he focuses on the Supreme Court, the Constitution, and the decline of liberal democracy in the United States. He received a JD from Duke University and is the author of two books on the Supreme Court.

The fight over who will become the next president is unlikely to end on Election Day if Vice President Kamala Harris prevails in the upcoming election.

We know this because of former President Donald Trump’s behavior after he lost the 2020 election. Trump didn’t just incite an insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6, 2021; he and his fellow Republicans filed a wave of lawsuits seeking to skew the election results. And, with the help of some of the most unscrupulous lawyers in the country, Trump devised a fantastical scheme to replace legitimate members of the Electoral College with his own loyalists.

Yet, while more shenanigans are almost certainly inevitable if Trump comes up short in November, the legal landscape in 2024 is less favorable to these kinds of dirty tricks than it was in 2020. The biggest reason for that is that lawyers thrive on novelty, while courts are supposed to follow previous precedents when deciding new cases.

SCOTUS, Explained Get the latest developments on the US Supreme Court from senior correspondent Ian Millhiser. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

In 2020, the world was suffering from the unusual calamity of the pandemic, which raised all sorts of legal questions that courts had not confronted before. That gave judges who were inclined to rule in Trump’s favor — Republicans control the federal judiciary — more leeway to place a thumb on the scale favoring the Republican Party and to do so without being accused of violating a clear precedent to the contrary.

In 2024, by contrast, large swaths of Americans are no longer cowering in their homes, fearful that a trip to the polls could infect them with Covid-19. Both the law and the nature of the two parties’ coalitions have shifted in ways that make it harder for Republicans to toy with who is able to cast a ballot.

That’s not to say anyone should expect Harris to simply be able to walk into the White House, even if she wins fair and square. If Harris prevails, Trump lawsuits seeking to overturn her victory are all but inevitable, as could be attempts to repeat the January 6 insurrection.

Indeed, some of this legal maneuvering has already begun. On Wednesday evening, for example, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court rejected the Republican Party’s claim that certain voters who cast mailed-in ballots improperly should effectively be disenfranchised, rather than being given another opportunity to vote on Election Day. It is probably inevitable that this case will be appealed to the US Supreme Court. If the highest Court embraces the GOP’s argument, that could potentially flip the result of an extraordinarily close election to Trump — but only if the winner of the presidential election all comes down to Pennsylvania, and the Pennsylvania race is very close.

It is difficult to predict in advance how many ballots will be impacted by this case, which is known as Genser v. Butler County Board of Elections, during the 2024 cycle, but we’re probably only talking about enough votes to increase Harris’s vote count by maybe a few thousand.

Overall — even taking into account the Genser case — Trump’s lawyers have less to work with this year than they did four years ago.

Novel legal issues breed bad law

The worst place to be, if you are a lawyer, is arguing a truly novel case before a hostile panel of judges.

Democrats already got a taste of this nightmare earlier this year. There’s never been a viable presidential candidate who incited an insurrection. Nor has there been one who, while previously serving as president, committed very serious crimes in office. These unique facts produced unprecedented court proceedings, including a Colorado state Supreme Court decision holding Trump ineligible for the presidency because of his role in the insurrection and a criminal prosecution of a former president.

The Republican-controlled Supreme Court, however, seized upon these unique cases to hand down two extraordinarily pro-Trump decisions: one that effectively neutralized the Constitution’s ban on insurrectionist presidents for the duration of the 2024 election, and another that gave Donald Trump sweeping immunity from criminal prosecution for crimes he committed using the power of the presidency.

The only good thing that can be said about these decisions is that they are in the past. Trump’s criminality did raise novel legal questions, but those questions have now been resolved. It’s hard to see how Trump’s lawyers could leverage the fact that he incited an insurrection in 2020 to challenge the result of the 2024 election, or to change how that election is conducted any more than he already has.

The pandemic is over. That’s bad news for Trump’s legal team.

The 2020 election itself raised a host of novel legal questions, but those questions largely emerged from the highly unusual circumstances created by the Covid-19 pandemic. During the pandemic, many voters understandably did not wish to vote in an indoor polling place where they could potentially catch the coronavirus from a fellow citizen. So state and federal officials altered election procedures in many states to make it easier to cast ballots by mail.

Significantly, however, all three of these decisions received a chilly reception from a Republican Supreme Court. In the Wisconsin case, the Republican justices ordered the state to toss out ballots that were not postmarked by Election Day — even though many ballots had no postmark at all. In the South Carolina case, the Supreme Court reinstated the state law.

The Pennsylvania Supreme Court’s decision, meanwhile, wound up surviving contact with the US Supreme Court, but probably only due to an accident of timing. The case reached the Court during the interregnum between Democratic Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s death and Republican Justice Amy Coney Barrett’s confirmation, and the eight remaining justices split 4-4 on whether to toss out the contested Pennsylvania ballots.

Ultimately, the Court dismissed the case as moot, in large part because Joe Biden won the state by a large enough margin that it wouldn’t have mattered if these ballots were thrown in the trash.

But the fact that Biden’s margin of victory was enough to overcome this lawsuit does not mean that the democratic process would have played out fairly if the election had been closer. Had Pennsylvania been close enough that the fate of these contested ballots would have decided it, the Republican justices could have easily made up a reason to hand the election to Trump — the Court’s right flank even had a legal argument ready to go, and the novelty of the legal issues presented by the pandemic would have left Biden without any clear precedent he could use to criticize such a ruling.

In any event, few, if any, of the novel legal questions that arose out of the pandemic are still an issue in 2024. And even if Republicans do succeed in having many mailed ballots tossed out, they are unlikely to gain as much of an advantage from such a decision as they would have in 2020.

One reason Republican lawyers targeted vote-by-mail rules in 2020 was that Democrats were far more likely to vote by mail than Republicans — an MIT report on the 2020 election found that “[s]ixty percent of Democrats, compared to 32 percent of Republicans, reported voting by mail.” So Trump’s lawyers knew they could potentially change the election result by maximizing the number of mailed ballots that got tossed out.

This year, by contrast, early data suggests that Republicans are less reluctant to vote absentee than they were in 2020. And more Democrats in states that offer both in-person and mail-in voting are expected to vote in person because there’s no longer a pandemic forcing them to remain at home.

To be sure, Republicans apparently still believe they can gain an advantage by making it harder to vote by mail. Why would the GOP have asked the Pennsylvania Supreme Court to disqualify many voters who cast a mailed ballot in the Genser case, after all, unless Republicans believed that Democrats still have an edge among people who vote by mail? But this edge is likely to be smaller than it was in 2020.

More broadly, beyond the insurrection-related issues that the Republican justices already resolved in Trump’s favor, Trump’s lawyers have yet to identify similarly novel legal questions that could give the courts sweeping authority to reshape how the 2024 election is conducted.

That doesn’t mean that the courts will behave themselves, especially if the 2024 election is close, but it does give Trump’s legal team less material to work with than they had in 2020.

Low-propensity voters increasingly favor Republicans

For most of the 2000s, the battle lines in the voting rights wars were pretty clearly defined: Republicans tended to support legislation that made it marginally more difficult to vote, while Democrats fought in both court and in state and federal legislatures to make it easier to cast a ballot.

As recently as 2021, for example, Georgia Republicans reacted to Biden’s 2020 victory in that state by tightening down the state’s voter ID law, limiting the use of drop boxes to collect ballots, banning volunteers from giving food and water to people waiting in line to vote, and paving the way for a MAGA takeover of the state’s board of elections. Democrats almost universally opposed this Georgia law.

Similarly, on the US Supreme Court, Republican justices have consistently voted to uphold restrictive election laws and to dismantle laws like the federal Voting Rights Act, which are intended to hinder these kinds of restrictions.

For the moment, at least, neither party appears to be backing away from its historic position on voting rights. But it is less clear than it was, say, 15 years ago, that these kinds of restrictions benefit Republicans. It’s possible that, to the extent that they matter at all, some of these laws might give a slight boost to Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris.

One reason why it is now less clear that these sorts of laws harm Democrats is that we have more data than we did a dozen years ago. In the 2010s, for example, voting rights advocates and even many journalists and academics warned that strict voter ID laws (which require voters to show photo ID at the polls in order to vote) could significantly diminish Democratic turnout. Election forecaster Nate Silver, for example, predicted that a strict voter ID law in Pennsylvania “would reduce President Obama’s margin against Mitt Romney by a net of 1.2 percentage points” in the 2012 election.

More recent studies, however, suggest that voter ID is a wash. A 2019 paper, for example, found that “the laws have no negative effect on registration or turnout, overall or for any group defined by race, gender, age, or party affiliation.”

Even if these laws do work as intended, it’s no longer clear that Republicans benefit from marginal restrictions on the franchise — whether that restriction is a voter ID law or something similar like limits on early voting or voting by mail.

Since Trump arrived on the scene, however, Democrats have made gains among high-propensity voting demographics such as highly educated voters and suburbanites. Trump, meanwhile, has made inroads with many of the same groups that were once believed to be discouraged from voting by laws like voter ID.

Republicans, in other words, now have less incentive to pass laws or push lawsuits that will make it harder to vote on the margins, and if they do use these tactics, they could come to regret it. At the very least, it is now far from clear that Republicans can skew elections by placing small but significant legal hurdles between voters and the polls.

Congress fixed an incomprehensible election law

Until recently, the process Congress used to count and certify the Electoral College’s votes for a new president was governed by the Electoral Count Act, an 1887 law signed by then-President Grover Cleveland. If you enjoy pain, you can read the full text of this law here. I can assure you it is so labyrinthian it might have been drafted by a minotaur.

After Trump’s failed insurrection in 2020, however, a bipartisan coalition of lawmakers enacted a new law governing the vote-counting process, which reads more like a modern-day statute. That takes away Trump’s legal team’s ability to hunt for ambiguous passages in the old law and claim that they require Trump to be placed back in the White House.

Admittedly, one of the most glaring problems with the old law is unlikely to be an issue in 2024. The old law stated that the vice president shall preside over the congressional session where electoral votes are counted but did not specify the vice president’s specific duties. In 2020, Trump and his lawyers tried to claim that then-Vice President Mike Pence had the power to effectively toss out many of Biden’s electoral votes and install Trump as the winner.

The new law, by contrast, clarifies that the vice president’s duties are almost entirely “ministerial in nature.”

In any event, Harris is currently both the sitting vice president and the Democratic nominee for the presidency, so the likelihood that she would toss out some of her own electoral votes is vanishingly small. But the new law clarifies that a future vice president cannot use the counting process to change the result of an election.

That clarification — and the others — should give Trump’s lawyers less to work with if they want to try to overthrow the result of the 2024 election.
covers politics and society for Vox. She first joined Vox in 2019, and her work has also appeared in Politico, Washington Monthly, and the New Republic.

Donald Trump welcomes Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to the stage at a Turning Point Action campaign rally at the Gas South Arena on October 23, 2024, in Duluth, Georgia. Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

In several swing states, the 2024 election polls are practically tied. The slightest factor could impact the results either way — including the presence of a third-party candidate on the ballot.

Third-party candidates don’t tend to get much traction: Without a major party behind them, every step of the electoral process is decidedly more difficult, including building name recognition, earning endorsements, getting on the ballot or a debate stage, and fundraising.

But third-party candidates don’t need much support to disrupt a race. In the last two election cycles, the average number of votes that decided the results in the seven swing states was less than 125,000 votes. In Wisconsin, for example, the election went Donald Trump’s way by 22,748 votes in 2016 and Joe Biden’s by 20,682 in 2020 — an average margin of victory of less than 21,715 votes. And while any one third-party candidate is unlikely to crack that threshold alone, votes for all third-party candidates combined have well surpassed that threshold in some states.

Kyle Kondik, managing editor of Sabato’s Crystal Ball at the University of Virginia Center for Politics, said that this year, the third-party vote share is likely to be closer to what it was in 2020 (about 2 percent) than what it was in 2016 (about 6 percent). That might be in part because 2016 saw an unusually large share of Americans dissatisfied with their options for president, and Vice President Kamala Harris’s entry into the race to replace Biden this year appears to have given most Democratic-leaning voters a candidate they can get behind.

Still, Kondik said it’s “possible, if not likely, that the total third-party share will be bigger than the margin between Trump and Harris in one or more states.”

That means that third-party voters, notoriously unpredictable and difficult to persuade, could play a decisive role in a very close election, swinging it in either Trump’s or Harris’s direction.

There are a few key third-party candidates to know. None of them is very popular, but together, the top four are polling at about 3 percent nationally. (Notably, most polling averages and models have Harris and Trump within 2 percentage points of each other).

Chief among the third-party candidates who made it on swing-state ballots this year is the Green Party’s Jill Stein, a progressive who drew Democratic-leaning voters in her previous two presidential bids.

Stein is on the ballot in every swing state except Nevada, and she’s been backed by a Muslim American group in Michigan called “Abandon Harris.” Harris is struggling among Arab American voters there who helped power Biden’s 2020 victory in the state and who oppose the administration’s approach to the war in Gaza.

Both Stein and the Libertarian Party nominee Chase Oliver each claim about 1 percent support nationally, according to recent New York Times polling. That’s less than Stein’s vote share in 2016, when she last ran for president.

Still, it could be enough to upset the results in the same states where she’s previously earned significant numbers of voters: In 2016, she earned more votes in the “Blue Wall” states of Michigan and Wisconsin than Trump’s margins of victory in those states.

Another potential wild card in those states is independent Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who suspended his campaign and endorsed Trump in August.

Given his embrace of the anti-establishment views held by certain segments of the GOP and his status as a member of the Democratic Kennedy dynasty, he was once seen as a potential spoiler for both Trump and Biden. Kennedy was polling around 10 percent nationally for the better part of 2024, and even higher in some swing-state polls. But his support cratered to less than 5 percent in August after Harris assumed the Democratic nomination, suggesting that many Democrats saw him as the only alternative to Biden and were not particularly invested in his candidacy.

Now, he has more potential to be a spoiler for Trump. He’s recently polled at about half a percentage point, on par with independent Cornel West, according to the New York Times.

Though he managed to take himself off the ballot in Arizona, Georgia, Nevada, and North Carolina, the Supreme Court refused to grant his emergency request to take him off the ballot in Michigan and Wisconsin. Harris is leading in those states by a less than 1 percentage point, according to FiveThirtyEight’s polling averages.

Other third-party candidates include the Socialism and Liberation Party’s Claudia De la Cruz, the Independent American Party’s Joel Skousen, the Constitution Party’s Randall Terry, and the Socialist Equality Party’s Joseph Kishore. None of them have the support the above four have managed to eke out, however.

Together, these third-party candidates have some potential to cut into both Harris and Trump’s vote margins in states that they need to win. Still, as much as third-party candidates may often appear to siphon away votes from the two major party candidates, the results of the election might not be any different if they were not on the ballot.

“Third-party voters can be quirky and may not be all that gettable by either campaign — perhaps some of them wouldn’t have voted major-party even if those were the only options,” Kondik said.

Update, October 30, 10:45 am: This story, originally published October 27, has been updated with new polling and a Supreme Court ruling that Kennedy must remain on the ballot in two swing states.
It’s not an overstatement to say that Elon Musk, the billionaire owner of X and CEO of Tesla and SpaceX, is former President Donald Trump’s biggest fanboy — and patron — in the 2024 election.

In the spring, Musk launched a political action committee, simply called America, lined up other high-profile rich guys from his Rolodex, and then threw an additional $75 million of his own money into the pot. According to filings with the Federal Election Commission, America PAC has spent more than $100 million on getting Trump re-elected, sending hundreds of canvassers out to talk to voters one-on-one in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

And of course, this week, Musk pledged to give away a million dollars a day until the election to registered swing-state voters who signed his PAC’s petition, only to reportedly receive a letter from the Department of Justice warning that the contest could be in violation of federal voting law.

As Musk’s politics move ever rightward — or at least, as Vox’s Zack Beauchamp writes, toward “a specific type of edgelord bigotry that drifts frequently into debunked conspiracy theories” — it’s worth asking what he wants to get out of the whole deal. An appointment to some unnamed new “government efficiency” commission? Untold power over the agencies that seek to regulate his companies? Or, improbably, a tax break?

What does loyalty to Trump net him — or anyone else courting the former president’s favor — in the end?

I spoke with Vox senior reporter Whizy Kim, who has been reporting on Musk, his fans, lawsuits, and even his text messages since the months leading to his 2022 purchase of Twitter, to try to understand where Elon Musk the man, the media mogul, and the politically ambitious demagogue intersect. What does Musk really want? And if he gets it, what will it mean for the rest of us? (Our conversation has been condensed for length and lightly edited.)

Today, Explained Understand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Lavanya Ramanathan: When you look back on the moment Elon Musk bought Twitter, and now consider it in the current context of how he’s now trying to invest heavily in politics, do you see parallels there?

Whizy Kim: I don’t think it is at all an accident that Elon Musk decided to buy Twitter, and then slowly became more politically vocal. He has a huge megaphone now. He’s the owner of a site that a lot of people still use, especially for stuff that’s related to the news. So I do think that there is a direct connection between him first talking about how Twitter should be this public “town square” where everyone can have their beliefs heard, where free speech is respected, to today, where he has reinstated a lot of banned accounts, including Trump, Marjorie Taylor Greene, and other incendiary figures. There’s also much more right-wing content that you see on the site if you visit X today compared to a few years ago.

There’s been a big transformation in the way Americans perceive Elon Musk since then. Besides the fact that the value of Twitter has tanked and the number of users has declined, you’ve written about his fanboys, the people that really looked up him — predominantly young men. Is he still really influential with this set?

In the past, he was definitely seen as more of a liberal hero. Not that he was always supporting Democratic candidates and politicians, but he was a guy who had popularized electric vehicles. When I talked to his former fans for a piece, a lot of them talked about how they were drawn to his passion for climate change and the environment. He cared about the future of humanity. And they saw him as very much like a mythic heroic figure, kind of a Tony Stark. They admired how much he seemed to be in service of civilization, not just with Tesla, but even with SpaceX, and wanting to further humanity’s mission beyond Earth.



And then the more he talked on Twitter, especially about his political views, they realized he could be very volatile. He could really lash out at anyone who criticized him. Several people told me that doesn’t seem befitting of a CEO of several major companies, acting childishly and immaturely in reaction to someone maybe making a good point.

I hear a lot of similarities between him and Donald Trump there. What do these two men have in common?

Personality-wise, and just in terms of their worldview, what I really noticed from the X conversation that they had in August was that they both come from a place of feeling personally aggrieved. Trump at many points talked about how his opponents had engaged unfairly against him, all of these criminal court cases against him, these trials, because they don’t want him to win the election. They’ve both frequently been critics of the media. Elon Musk has also talked about how legacy media is really biased and doesn’t platform the truth. They could sort of look at each other and say, “Yeah, you get me. We’ve both been unfairly attacked.”

Tesla and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk speaks with former President Donald Trump during a campaign event in Butler, Pennsylvania, on October 5. Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post via Getty Images

And what is their end game here? What does Elon Musk stand to gain from an association with Trump, and now a financial stake in Trump’s victory?

Under the Biden administration, Elon Musk felt that a lot of these regulatory agencies are staffed with people who are keeping a close eye over corporate misbehavior. His companies have been investigated or fined by different government agencies, whether it’s the Labor Board, OSHA, the SEC, or the Department of Transportation, and Elon Musk sees this as unfair. Even if he acknowledges that his companies didn’t follow safety regulations, he’ll be like, well, those safety measures are stupid, anyway. I think I know best. I run my company. I am an expert in these fields. The government is just clunky and slowing us down.

One of the things that he proposed during the Trump interview was some sort of government efficiency commission. And Trump was kind of like, oh, yeah, that’s a good idea … and maybe you can help run it. Essentially, that kind of commission would slash the budgets of a lot of regulatory agencies.

Trump and Musk are sort of framing that as creating a government that’s more sensible and efficient about the budget, but really, it could also potentially serve as a way to flush the budgets of agencies that have been coming after his companies. If he has Trump’s ear, you know, he could say, “Well, maybe if you want to appoint a new person to the Labor Board, it should be someone more friendly to businesses, rather than to workers.” That’s a potential kind of alliance that they could form.

We know that billionaires, that Silicon Valley, are oftentimes more secretive about their involvement in politics. What Elon Musk has been doing is really shining a light on big business billionaire donors and the way they operate in the political sphere, so it’s easier to see. Where does this end for Musk, if Trump wins, or if Trump doesn’t win?

I do think that he will continue to be more politically vocal, because he’s opened up a can of worms. It’s harder to go back when there’s a long record of him coming out for a Trump crowd, officially endorsing him, and all of that.

Elon Musk is the evolution of what started from Peter Thiel. When Thiel first came out as this mega-conservative donor, people were like, wow, he’s so open and vocal in a world that tends to be more liberal. Now, we have Elon Musk, we have David Sacks, all these other Silicon Valley figures who are trying to elect Trump.

But obviously, one of the reasons why these wealthy, influential figures try to stay quiet is because they want to play both sides, right? Elon Musk has come out so vociferously as pro-Trump and criticizing Biden and criticizing Kamala Harris. If Kamala Harris wins, is there room for Elon to come back and say, “Hey, let’s still work together in some capacity?” That’s going to be a much harder road.
For years, the chief complaint leveled against the American legal system has been that it is simply too, too slow to keep up with the high-speed criming perpetrated by Donald J. Trump. We blame two failed impeachments on Congress for taking too long, we fault Attorney General Merrick Garland for waiting far too long to charge Trump for his many crimes, we rage at Jack Smith for failing to move more hastily and for not bringing a tight, just-add-water indictment, and then we gnash our teeth each time the Supreme Court dreams up some pretext for sending everyone back to GO and ensuring that there can never be any form of accountability for the former president’s worst malfeasance. By its very nature the justice system is glacial, methodical, punctilious, and backward-looking in ways that make keeping up with the well-resourced, wealthy career criminal supremely challenging.

While all of that is true, it’s increasingly apparent that the same charge can be leveled against journalism as well: that this elaborate system of fact-processing tools that was constructed to‍—how did we quaintly put it, “hold power to account”?—suffers from virtually all the same failings as does the law. The very same qualities that have made it nearly impossible to have any meaningful legal accountability stick to the former president in a court of law are now revealing themselves as the same things that plague journalism.

Advertisement

To briefly review: Donald Trump declined to accept the results of the 2020 election and fomented an insurrection at the Capitol that supported his claim that the election was “stolen.” To this day he insists that the election was the product of a Big Lie. None of that matters, though, to two of the biggest newspapers in the country: On Wednesday, it was reported that the Los Angeles Times, and on Friday, the Washington Post, decided that they will not endorse Donald Trump’s opponent in the election because insert audio of gum popping, raging brush fires, and the sound of champagne bottles opening. It turns out the billionaires who own our few remaining news institutions that have the resources to do journalism think—like half of the voting populace does—that all that journalism they paid for is just irrelevant. Note to journalism: Ya blew it.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

In the waning days ahead of another election where democracy—oh, and by the way, fascism— are demonstrably on the ballot, as we await the much-vaunted “October Surprise” that could somehow break the fever hold of denialism around Trump’s moral and political and cognitive failings, we seem to have forgotten that the very idea of amassing evidence and putting on proof is now fully antiquated. The very notion that the American voter is open to evidence and proof in this campaign is the same category error that allowed us to believe that a guilty verdict would change hearts and minds. This is the Algorithm Election, and the systems that once existed to test facts are obsolete. Much like criminal processes, and facts themselves, journalism is lacing up its sneakers as Donald Trump, Tucker Carlson, and Elon Musk are circumnavigating the globe with oozing lies. Jeff Bezos, meanwhile, is deciding to put on his slippers for the evening and sit by a nice, comfy democratic dumpster fire.

Advertisement

Related From Slate Here’s What Was in the Evidence Document Trump Really Didn’t Want Unsealed Read More

We can and will debate why this is so. Jeffrey Goldberg’s devastating reporting this week on Trump’s desire for Nazi generals who are loyal only to him should have exploded into the news stratosphere with its many revelations, chief among them Trump’s own chief of staff John Kelly’s horrified sense that Trump simply doesn’t believe the military serves anyone but him. Kelly’s willingness to call Trump a “fascist” would have also been a revelation, save for the fact that it collapsed into yet another round of internecine banter about who gets to use the word “fascist.” Partly journalism cannot rise to the occasion because it is now wholly enslaved to self-serving oligarchs and tech bros. Partly journalism can’t rise to the occasion because everyone decided to save it all for their book launch. Partly journalism can’t rise to the occasion because we will never shake off our obsession with horse races and novelty, and partly journalism can’t rise to the occasion because we live in a world of such impenetrable bubbles that even were an October surprise to burst through the sound and light show, the people who most need to see and hear and believe it never would. The October surprise, then, is that we are incapable of doing through journalism what we are also incapable of doing through the justice system: agreeing on facts and holding malefactors to account.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

We can and will debate in the years to come whether this is because we allowed local journalism to wither and die on the vine, or whether it’s because we allowed capitalism to swallow journalism, just as it swallowed state courts and local governments. We can someday debate whether we so fully blurred the lines between fact and opinion that we allowed voters to believe that their own opinions mattered more than agreed-upon facts. And we can discuss whether journalism finally shrugged its shoulders and gave up and became a reality show before or after the courts did. But the undisputed truth is that there can be no undisputed truth, because Donald Trump is an arcing, sparking, frothing, flaming, black hole of truth consumption, and because millions of his followers believe him when he says that the press lies and the justice system is the deep state.

Advertisement

Perhaps, then, the problem is not so much a question of speed as of time. Donald Trump has managed to outrun the law and the press not because he is faster than either, but because we live in an age in which neither serves as an arbiter of anything meaningful. We in the media continue to imagine that the next story, or the next revelation, or the next sex tape will provide the smoking gun in much the same way we used to imagine that the boxes of classified documents at Mar-a-Lago would ultimately tilt the public consciousness into reality. This is not a call to give up on journalism. It’s a call to look around and be scrupulously honest about who among us has given up on journalism, why, and if there’s any conceivable way back.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

There is still a lot to be done in the days remaining in this contest, and especially in the fraught days that will follow, when Trump and Trumpism will utilize both law and journalism to pollute the vote count and question the election process. But that in turn demands that we in the press remain true to the things we already know how to do: investigate, report, bear witness, question, take our time, and admit that we don’t know what we don’t know. There is one side in this election that intends, as it has done for the past two presidential contests, to flood the zone with shit: to lie fluently and constantly in the knowledge that destabilizing confidence in the media and the courts is fascism’s own special Christmas miracle. We owe it not just to journalism and to the rule of law but to democracy itself to persist in believing in and also fighting for our centuries-old systems of truth-seeking, just as we recognize that they are suffering under the greatest stress test of our lifetimes. It is uniquely possible, this time, that journalism isn’t coming to save us any more than the courts are coming to save us, and that we therefore need to rally to save them both. While we are at it, we need to recognize that the moment has come to save ourselves, and that the time left to us can be measured in hours and days, not years and decades.
is a senior correspondent at Vox covering foreign policy and world news with a focus on the future of international conflict. He is the author of the 2018 book, Invisible Countries: Journeys to the Edge of Nationhood , an exploration of border conflicts, unrecognized countries, and changes to the world map.

No less an authority than Russian President Vladimir Putin has predicted that the coming years in global affairs will be a “revolutionary situation”: a reference to a line of Vladimir Lenin’s from 1913, just prior to World War I. Putin’s counterpart in China, Xi Jinping, concurs, foreseeing “changes the likes of which we haven’t seen for 100 years.”

This doesn’t mean World War III is inevitable or even likely. But it does mean we are in an era when the decisions of major leaders in moments of crisis could have an outsize impact on global security and the lives of millions.

This also is the moment, after a stunning win, when Donald Trump will return to the presidency.

The year 2016, when Trump was elected the first time, didn’t exactly feel like a very peaceful or stable moment in world history. The Syrian civil war and the US-led campaign against ISIS were raging. In June, one of the terror group’s sympathizers killed 49 people at a gay nightclub in Orlando. Russian-backed forces were occupying much of Eastern Ukraine.

About a month before the election, North Korea conducted its most powerful nuclear test to date. Europe was still in the midst of an unprecedented influx of migrants from the Middle East and Africa, which would end up having dramatic political consequences in several countries. Sen. Ted Cruz was terrifying 3-year-olds on the campaign trail by telling them the world was “on fire.”

And yet, viewed from the vantage point of this year, 2016 feels like a simpler time. Wars of all types have gotten more common and deadlier around the world in the years since, and superpower conflict — a concern that had largely receded in the post-Cold War era — is back on the agenda.

In short, the global situation Trump will inherit this time around will be far more dangerous and unpredictable. And that in turn raises the risks of his erratic and transactional approach to foreign policy.

What was, eight years ago, a localized “gray zone” conflict in Eastern Ukraine is now the first major land war in Europe in decades, one in which Russia’s president has repeatedly threatened to use nuclear weapons. Israel’s war in Gaza, already one of the deadliest conflicts for civilians of the 20th century, is fast spiraling into a regional conflict that could involve direct combat between Israel and Iran and could yet drag in the US military.

Further east, potentially even more dangerous conflicts loom. Many North Korea watchers believe the country is preparing for war, and that the risk of all-out conflict on the Korean peninsula — which could potentially kill more than a million people, even if North Korea doesn’t use its nuclear arsenal — has never been higher.

China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran — a group some have dubbed the “axis of upheaval” — may not have much in common in terms of ideology of overall interests, but they are increasingly collaborating: The reported presence of North Korean troops fighting alongside Russian forces in Ukraine is just the latest example.

None of this is to downplay the wars and security threats that existed in 2016 and continued through Trump’s first term, nor the obviously massive disruptive effect of the Covid-19 pandemic. But state versus state conflict, and even superpower versus superpower conflict, is an entirely different matter than war against terrorist groups. Gray zone conflict is a different matter than open warfare. Recent rapid advances in drone technology and artificial intelligence are likely to make the wars of the future all the more unpredictable, and potentially more destructive.

All of which makes the idea of putting back in the Oval Office a president who proudly calls his foreign policy approach “crazy” so dangerous.

A world on fire

Even putting aside the issues of Trump’s temperament, mental acuity, or the warnings from multiple senior national security officials from his own past administration that they believe he is dangerously unqualified for the presidency, there are several reasons to believe a new Trump presidency would amplify this “revolutionary situation” rather than moderate it.

First, Trump does not put much value on the idea of territorial integrity. It may sound like a wonky academic point, but we tend to take for granted that in our current era, countries rarely conquer each other and borders are rarely changed by force. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has obviously challenged this taboo against what the UN Charter calls the “threat or use of force against the territorial integrity” of other countries.

As president, Trump reportedly told other world leaders that the Crimean peninsula, which was illegally annexed from Ukraine in 2014, is rightfully Russian because everyone there speaks Russian. Figures close to the Trump campaign like Tucker Carlson and Elon Musk have openly endorsed the view that Crimea is rightfully Russian.

Trump overturned decades of US policy and international consensus by recognizing Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, which he has described as a snap decision made after a quick history lesson from his ambassador to Israel and his son-in-law Jared Kushner. He did the same for Morocco’s claims over the disputed region of Western Sahara, in return for Morocco recognizing Israel. (In fairness, the Biden administration hasn’t reversed either of these moves — once the taboo is broken, it’s hard to reestablish.) For Trump, the president who, after all, mused about buying Greenland, sovereignty and territorial integrity are like anything else in a deal: negotiable.

Second, Trump doesn’t value alliances. One reason Russia has not attacked any of the countries bordering Ukraine, even as weapons flow into Ukraine from those countries, is that they are members of NATO, meaning that an attack on them could bring a military response from the alliance as a whole. It’s proof of concept for the most powerful military alliance in history.

Trump tends to take a narrowly transactional view of alliances. His antipathy to NATO and threats to pull the US out of the alliance have been well-documented, as have his comments that treat the US defense of Asian partners like Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan as a protection racket.

The third related point is Trump’s attitude toward nuclear weapons. Defying many predictions made at the dawn of the nuclear age, no nuclear weapon has been used in war since 1945, a record that likely involves both a bit of luck as well as the power of nuclear deterrence and the very justified fear these weapons cause. Trump, though, seems a bit more blasé on the topic.

The issue is not just Trump’s own attitude toward nuclear weapons. In a number of US allies in Europe and Asia, there is now an active debate over whether they need nuclear deterrents of their own, driven in part by concerns over whether they could actually count on the US nuclear umbrella. Even Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy recently suggested that without effective security guarantees from allies, his country might need nuclear weapons for protection.

The international community’s success at limiting the number of nuclear powers is one of the biggest reasons why the nuclear taboo has remained intact. But a world with more nuclear powers is a world where the use of nuclear weapons is more likely, and that world becomes more likely if allies don’t believe security guarantees are worth the paper they’re printed on.

An agent of chaos in the Oval Office

During the campaign, Trump countered that the very fact that the world has become so dangerous is the reason he should be returned to the presidency. He repeatedly made the unprovable claims that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and Hamas’s October 7 attacks would not have happened had he been president. He also falsely claimed that there were no terrorist attacks and no wars during his presidency.

Those claims elide the major military escalations in Iraq, Syria, and Somalia that took place under his tenure, as well as risky actions like the assassination of Iranian general Qassem Soleimani, which prompted an Iranian missile strike on US troops in Iraq. Thankfully, no one was killed in those strikes, but commanders say up to 150 troops could have been. As president, he reportedly considered missile strikes into Mexico and the idea of sending troops into America’s neighbor — and No. 1 trading partner — has evolved into a mainstream Republican position.

The Trump case, essentially, is that he was able to rule the world through fear. In his debate with Vice President Kamala Harris, he cited his ideological ally Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán: “Why is the whole world blowing up? [Orbán] said, ‘Because you need Trump back as president. They were afraid of him. China was afraid.’ And I don’t like to use the word afraid, but I’m just quoting him. ‘China was afraid of him. North Korea was afraid of him.’ Look at what’s going on with North Korea, by the way. He said ‘Russia was afraid of him.’”

Trump also claimed he threatened to strike Moscow if Putin attacked Ukraine, though it’s not quite clear when this was since Russian troops were in Ukrainian territory throughout the entirety of Trump’s presidency.

It’s also not clear that US adversaries were deterred by Trump’s tough-guy posturing. Trump has maintained that the punishing sanctions he put on Iran after withdrawing from the nuclear deal stopped it from orchestrating attacks in the region, but he had little response after Iran attacked Saudi oil infrastructure in 2019.

The killing of Soleimani did not stop Iran’s proxies from attacking US troops in Iraq. When it comes to Taiwan, he has suggested that the island is simply too small and insignificant to be worth defending — the kind of rhetoric that might influence China’s calculations over a possible invasion.

Once more unto the breach

In recent weeks, world affairs have seemed to be in a bit of a holding pattern, with leaders not making major decisions until they see the results of November 5. Trump may have soured a bit on his onetime good friend Benjamin Netanyahu, but in all likelihood — based on his past record — he will apply even less pressure than the Biden administration has to get Israel to reach a ceasefire in Gaza or allow in more humanitarian aid. A Trump win will likely embolden annexationists within the Israeli government, including the once-fringe but increasingly vocal movement in favor of reoccupying Gaza with Israeli settlers.

On Ukraine, Trump promised to end the conflict immediately. Judging by comments made by his running mate Sen. JD Vance, though, this would likely involve pressuring Ukraine to both cede territory to Russia and accept neutrality, without security guarantees — not far from Putin’s desired outcome. When it comes to China, the outlook is more unpredictable. Trump portrays himself as the ultimate China hawk, except when he believes doing so is bad for business.

Ultimately, the question is not whether Trump is a hawk or a dove. It’s what a return of the chaos and unpredictability that marked his first tenure will mean in a world where the risk of cataclysm is now so much higher.

Update, November 6, 7:50 am ET: This story, originally published October 28, has been updated to reflect the results of the 2024 presidential election.



Correction, October 28, 10 am ET: A previous version of this story misstated the year that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down. It was in 2014.
“Do you think Donald Trump is going to win?”

For months I’ve been asked this question nearly every day by friends, family, neighbors, acquaintances at parties, and readers. My response is always the same: “I don’t know: All the data indicates this is a coin-toss election.”

After such a dramatic roller coaster of an election season — Trump surviving assassination attempts; President Joe Biden dropping out; Vice President Harris stepping in and surpassing Trump in the polls; and Trump closing the gap with Harris in these final weeks — it’s understandable that people are curious about what supposed political experts think will happen next.

If you fear a crisis for the republic brought on by Trump’s return to office, then the crisis is already here.

But the tone — and frequency — with which I hear the question suggests something more than just curiosity. It betrays anxiety. The manic attention paid to the polls isn’t just about how close the race is, but how high stakes it is. Many liberals and conservatives are addicted to watching minute-by-minute analysis of battleground surveys in an attempt to get a sense of how much they should emotionally prepare themselves for a possible Trump victory.I’m happy to report there is a remedy for this feeling: step away from the ghastly election needles and get more involved in the political process.

Polls are important tools for democracy, but the popular culture surrounding polling can undermine democracy. It’s important for citizens to understand each other’s attitudes and how they change over time. But incessant tracking of who’s up and who’s down and microanalysis of demographic shifts can transfix people in unhealthy ways. Democracy becomes gamified, and many of those who consider themselves politically engaged become passive spectators.

The reality is that the polls have long told us what we needed to know: this election is so close, there is no way to responsibly predict its outcome. From the vantage point of a citizen, everything else is noise. This will likely be, even more so than other recent elections, a race determined by turnout.If you fear a crisis for the republic brought on by Trump’s return to office, then the crisis is already here. A man whose former colleagues describe as a fascist is within striking distance of winning back the White House. The high plausibility of his success — propped up by the conviction of tens of millions of supporters — provides a lot support to the argument that democracy is losing.

It is imperative, then, to find a way to win that argument. No, not on social media. But on the ground in communities where votes are going to matter most. There are doors to be knocked, fellow citizens to be listened to and talked to. There’s no shortage of ways to participate in organized democratic efforts beyond just casting a ballot. Anyone who means what they say about fearing what could happen come Election Day should view voting as woefully insufficient for the challenge at hand.

This is true beyond just this election — and true regardless of how this election turns out. It is crucial for people who care about freedom from tyranny, economic exploitation and ecological catastrophe to unlearn the culture of hyperindividualism and political helplessness that prevails in capitalist democracies. In America, people predominantly see themselves as isolated individuals observing the political class, segments of which they periodically vote in and out of office in mostly binary contests. Many people confuse political hobbyism with political engagement, and let economic elites and their allies stack the deck when it comes to the vast majority of policy decisions.

There is an alternative. Think outside of the strict confines of a voting booth. Allow your fear and your hopes to move you. Liberals would be wise to look to their left in thinking about what it takes to fight plutocrats and right-wing demagogues who scapegoat the most marginalized among us. Form popular power by working in concert with co-workers, neighbors, friends and other groups with shared interests to build institutions that harness the will of the people outside the two major parties. These networks are critical for the long-run project of expanding multicultural democracy and economic freedom. And they can also mobilize in defense of whatever flawed version of democracy that currently exists.

What I notice among people who spend time on activism is that they sound more optimistic. This isn’t to say that they don’t experience anxiety about the future, or that they’re naive about the daunting odds that the left faces. A lot of them are exhausted. But putting in work gives people pride, grit and agency. It allows people to see firsthand what it takes to build mass power — and how doable it is if enough people get on board. It certainly beats watching a horror movie unfold on a screen.
This is an adapted excerpt from the Oct. 20 episode of "Velshi."

Donald Trump has said repeatedly that he only hires the “best people.” The claim started as a line on the campaign trail during his first presidential run.

In June 2015, far before he took over the Republican Party, Trump told a crowd in South Carolina: “I know the best people. I know the best managers. I know the best dealmakers. I know people who will make us so strong. I know guys that are so good.”

Trump’s White House saw a higher turnover of staff than every president since at least Ronald Reagan.

It was a line that stuck. It fit within the outsider appeal that carried him to his 2016 win. The government suits were either corrupt or stupid and he would replace them with only the best.

But upon entering the White House, a different storyline emerged: The idea was that Trump’s Cabinet would resemble the boardrooms of his old reality show “The Apprentice.” But what we actually ended up with was closer to an episode of “Survivor.”

Trump’s White House saw a higher turnover of staff — Cabinet secretaries and senior ranking advisers — than every president since at least Ronald Reagan, according to Brookings Institution data that goes back to 1980. More cabinet officials left their posts under Trump than under Presidents Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama and Joe Biden combined.

And Trump isn’t one for an amicable breakup. Jeff Sessions was the first U.S. senator to endorse Trump in 2016. In 2017, Sessions, who was serving as Trump’s first attorney general, recused himself from the Justice Department’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. Trump appeared to think the attorney general was his personal lawyer, not the country’s, and never forgave him. After a year of tweeting his dissatisfaction with Sessions, Trump finally fired him.

When Trump tapped Rex Tillerson to be his secretary of state, he said in a statement that the former ExxonMobil chairman was “among the most accomplished business leaders and international deal makers in the world.” That was December 2016. Two years later, after firing Tillerson via Twitter, Trump said Tillerson, “didn’t have the mental capacity needed. He was dumb as a rock and I couldn’t get rid of him fast enough. He was lazy as hell.”

We know Trump will take every opportunity to bash someone he “fired like a dog,” but it’s not a one-way street. Some of the most vocal Trump critics right now are the same people who once saw him run the country up close.

Former Trump national security adviser John Bolton and former Defense Secretary Mark Esper — also fired by tweet in 2019 and 2020 respectively — have both called Trump unfit to serve.

And of course, Trump's vice president, Mike Pence, who refused to carry out his order to overturn the 2020 election and whose life was threatened on Jan. 6, now says he cannot in good conscience endorse his former running mate in 2024.

There were also the grifters. Trump’s choice to run the Department of Health and Human Services, Tom Price, lasted less than a year in the job after spending almost $400,000 of the government’s money on chartered flights. His interior secretary, Ryan Zinke, resigned in 2018 after federal investigations were launched into the secretary’s travel habits and conflicts of interest. Trump’s Environmental Protection Agency chief, Scott Pruitt, quit when he became the subject of 13 different ethics investigations — but not before demanding an aide try to buy a used mattress for him from the Trump International Hotel.

At some point, Trump got sick of the lengthy appointment process for new Cabinet officials. In order to avoid Senate approval after every fire-by-tweet, Trump began appointing “acting secretaries” all over the government, who required no Senate confirmation and already carried with them an aura of replaceability.

In a February 2019 interview with CBS News, Trump defended this system by telling Margaret Brennan that he likes “acting [roles] because I can move so quickly. It gives me more flexibility.”

It’s worth noting that Project 2025, the conservative playbook for the next Trump administration, encourages making this tactic an explicit policy.

In order to avoid Senate approval after every fire-by-tweet, Trump began appointing “acting secretaries."

Trump’s reliance on “acting” secretaries unraveled more after Biden was declared the winner of the 2020 election. As Trump scoured for ways to deny his loss, he was desperate for yes-men at every level of government.

According to Washington Post reporting, in those final days, Trump turned to a die-hard named John McEntee to purge disloyal staffers. McEntee was then 30 years old and had already failed a security clearance at the White House in 2018.

McEntee, who had no policy experience, was permitted to clean house. He would reportedly hand pink slips to officials, firing some and demanding that others refuse to communicate with Biden’s presidential transition team.

McEntee ran the Presidential Personnel Office to Trump’s wishes, and in accordance with all of the suggestions in Project 2025: purge disloyals, remind everyone for whom they’re working, and reward obedience. He’s now a senior adviser for Project 2025, in charge of the presidential personnel database to pre-vet potential staffers for the next administration.

So, when Trump tells — and shows you — how he’s going to run the government and whom he’s going to hire, believe him the first time.
Ballot drop boxes are often the subject of false claims. Here's what to know

toggle caption Olivier Touron/AFP via Getty Images

Election officials say ballot drop boxes are a secure and accessible way for voters in many states to return their mail ballots, but they’ve also been the subject of numerous conspiracies and attacks from former President Donald Trump and other Republicans.

Some states that primarily vote by mail have long used drop boxes, but during the peak of the COVID pandemic in 2020, more states offered them or expanded their use.

The tamper-proof boxes are generally installed outside places like election offices, libraries and other government buildings, with rules about chain of custody and how ballots are collected. Many drop boxes are kept under surveillance. Some experts note they provide for safer and faster return of ballots than the postal service.

Sponsor Message

An Associated Press survey of most states found no major issues with drop boxes in the 2020 general election.

But after Trump’s election defeat, drop boxes became a target for baseless accusations of fraud, including the claim that Democrats stole the 2020 election by using ballot “mules” to stuff ballot drop boxes with fraudulent votes, popularized by right-wing commentator Dinesh D’Souza’s book and movie 2000 Mules.

The claims made in 2000 Mules were proven false by law enforcement, elections officials and media, and its publisher halted distribution of the film and book and apologized to a Georgia voter accused of illegally dropping off multiple ballots into a drop box.



What to expect during the 2024 election

Compared with 2020, fewer people will likely vote by mail in 2024, in part because of a shift toward in-person early voting, and partly because some states — including key swing states — have enacted restrictions on requesting and returning mail ballots.

In Georgia, for example, lawmakers drastically reduced the availability of drop boxes after the 2020 election, capping the number of boxes that can be offered, and limiting their access to inside early voting locations and only during early voting hours. A 2022 NPR/WABE/Georgia Public Broadcasting analysis found the restrictions disproportionately impacted access in larger counties that are home to more Democrats and nonwhite voters.

In Wisconsin, a newly liberal-leaning state supreme court in July overturned a ban on drop boxes, but Wisconsin election officials say only a fraction are offered this fall, compared with 2020.

On the other hand, Michigan changed its rules to make voting by mail easier, including an increase in ballot drop boxes, while Nevada transitioned to a universal vote-by-mail system that permanently enshrined some changes made during the pandemic.

According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, 27 states explicitly allow drop boxes and 12 states — mostly in the South — do not.
Former model Stacey Williams is latest woman to accuse Trump of sexual misconduct

toggle caption Marion Curtis/Starpix/INSTARimages/Reuters

Another woman has accused Donald Trump of sexual misconduct, adding to a list of more than a dozen women who have accused the former president of inappropriate sexual behavior.

Stacey Williams, a former Sports Illustrated model, claims Trump groped her in 1993, while Jeffrey Epstein, who was later convicted of sex offenses, looked on. She recounted the incident to CNN this week, as well as on a Zoom call with Survivors for Kamala, a group that’s unaffiliated with the campaign.

“The second he was in front of me, he pulled me into him, and his hands were just on me and didn’t come off,” she told CNN in an interview.

Sponsor Message

“Then the hands started moving, and they were on the side of my breasts, on my hips, back down to my butt … they were just on me the whole time.”

In a statement, Trump campaign National Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt denied the allegations on Trump's behalf.

"It's obvious this fake story was contrived by the Harris campaign to distract from the deeply concerning and newly unearthed allegations" about Harris' husband, Doug Emhoff, Leavitt wrote. Emhoff has been accused of striking an ex-girlfriend in 2012. The Harris campaign has denied this.

"Fake allegations like this are a disservice to women who are truly victims of assault," Leavitt added.

The alleged incident between Trump and Williams took place while Williams was dating Epstein, who was, in the 1980s and 1990s, a friend of Trump’s. Epstein had taken Williams to Trump Tower to meet Trump, and she says Trump immediately started groping her.

“This context made no sense because the hands were on me, and then he and Jeffrey just kept talking and looking at each other and smiling,” she said.

“I just had this really, like, sickening feeling that it was coordinated — that somehow the whole thing was, I was rolled in there like a piece of meat for some kind of weird, twisted game.”

Williams also says she received a postcard from Trump shortly after the encounter, where he wrote that Palm Beach, Fla. — site of what's now his Mar-a-Lago Club — was her "home away from home."

She told CNN that she didn’t talk about the incident for a long time, out of shame.

“I felt a wave of shame, and I just couldn’t think about it, face it, talk about it for a very long time. I put it in a little box inside of me, turned the key, locked it,” she said.

Many victims of sexual violence remain quiet long after those incidents occur.

Williams joins a list of women who have accused Trump of sexual assault and other forms of sexual misconduct. Trump has denied all of these allegations.

In addition, Trump bragged about groping and kissing women in the Access Hollywood tape, leaked one month before the 2016 election.

With just over a week until Election Day 2024, polls suggest that the electorate could have the widest gender gap in modern election history. Women voters preferred Harris by 18 points in the latest NPR Marist PBS NewsHour poll , while men voters preferred Trump by 16 points.

It’s unclear how much an allegation like this could sway voters; the Access Hollywood tape’s effects have been debated for years, and Trump did ultimately win that close race. In addition, most voters have their minds made up. This year’s polls have been remarkably stable in the months since Harris entered the race.
At a campaign event in North Carolina last month, Donald Trump, for reasons unknown, complained at some length about Barack Obama having won a Nobel Peace Prize. The Republican quickly added, “But I don’t care about that.”

Of course, in context, it was painfully obvious that he did care about that, which is why the former president brought it up unprompted.

A month later, the guy who said he didn’t care about Obama’s Nobel is still talking about it, incorporating this into his closing message with time running out in the 2024 election cycle. The New York Times reported on his latest event in Nevada, and the headline read, “At Las Vegas Rally, Trump Grumbles About Obama’s Nobel Prize.”

On a night when Barack Obama joined Kamala Harris onstage at a star-studded rally in Georgia, Donald J. Trump was smarting on the other side of the country — asking why Mr. Obama had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and not him. ... Mr. Trump suggested he was more deserving of the honor than his predecessor in the White House, saying his full name, Barack Hussein Obama, twice for emphasis.

A month after Trump assured an audience that he doesn’t really care about this, it was hard not to notice how much he cared about this. “I got elected in a much bigger, better, crazier election, but they gave him the Nobel Prize,” the GOP nominee added, as if this were relevant.

A day earlier, Trump told an audience that Obama is a “jerk,” and he substantiated the label by pointing to North Korea’s Kim Jong Un for validation.

This came on the heels of Trump telling a Pennsylvania audience that “a lot of people” believe a conspiracy theory that Obama is secretly running the White House — a line the Republican has peddled more than once recently.

Earlier this year, Trump also claimed that Rep. Ronny Jackson, when the Texas Republican was his White House physician, told him that he was in better shape than Obama.

As boasts go, this was, of course, very difficult to believe, but a larger question lurked overhead: Why in the world was Trump talking about this? The answer was that the former president’s obsession with his immediate predecessor has never really gone away.

To be sure, Trump spent much of his White House term fixated on Obama, too, prompting Paul Waldman to ask, “Has there ever been a president who talked so much about the man who preceded him? If so, I’m not aware of it.”

That was in February 2020. Nearly five years later, Obama continues to live rent-free in his successor’s mind.
The Menendez brothers—Lyle and Erik—committed a terrible crime more than 30 years ago. They were sentenced to life in prison. But suddenly they are having a moment. There’s a miniseries about them on Netflix. There’s a documentary, too. And there’s been a ton of TikTok videos made by people who are openly wondering: Should these two men still be behind bars?

“No one’s arguing that they didn’t kill their parents, but they’re saying the level of culpability would be so low that after 36 years, they should be out,” said Brian Buckmire, a criminal defense attorney and contributor at ABC News. I called him up because I wanted someone to walk me through how we got here. As someone who came of age around the time the Menendez brothers were arrested, their sudden reemergence has taken me by surprise.

Last week, the facts of the Menendez case suddenly became very relevant. In front of a Los Angeles criminal courthouse, the Menendez brothers’ family and their attorney gathered for what they called a “show of unity”—and a press conference. They said they had new evidence that the brothers’ crimes were inseparable from years of abuse they’d experienced at the hands of their father. And on Thursday, the Los Angeles County district attorney recommended that the brothers’ sentence be thrown out and they be resentenced and immediately eligible for parole.

Advertisement

On a recent episode of What Next, we spoke about why two of America’s most notorious criminals are asking to go free. Our conversation, which was recorded before the Los Angeles DA made his recommendation, has been condensed and edited for clarity.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Mary Harris: I have a strong sense memory of the Menendez brothers case, but I don’t have a lot of details. I just remember the broad outlines of the story: Two rich, handsome brothers killed their parents, and it took over the country. Can you fill in the details here?

Brian Buckmire: Lyle and Erik Menendez are from a very affluent family. The father, José Menendez, is a music executive. Cuban immigrant. American Dream type of story.

Advertisement

He clawed his way up to the top. And they were in Beverly Hills.

Exactly. But in 1989, at their Beverly Hills home, he and his wife, Kitty, are shot dead. At first the investigation thinks it’s a mob hit because of his connections with the music industry. But that doesn’t really hold water. It’s not until a year and change afterward that one of the brothers, Erik, tells his psychotherapist what happened—confesses to the murders. And that’s when the whole thing unravels for the brothers. They get arrested, charged with first-degree murder and special circumstances, specifically that they were lying in wait.

As the investigation goes, they went out the day before trying to get handguns, couldn’t get handguns, ended up buying shotguns because they had a quicker waiting period. Bought the ammunition, went to the home. The parents are watching a movie or TV or something. And they come up behind them and shoot them. Based on the trajectory of the bullets, the kill shot to the father is the back of the head and the mother is crawling away when one of the brothers reloads and then kills her. So, gruesome.

Advertisement

Advertisement

That reloading—I remember that detail because it was just so brutal. It’s like the mother was alive, and they reloaded and finished her off.

Advertisement

To say, OK, let’s go get more [bullets] and finish the job is a level of maliciousness that warrants a first-degree murder charge. When they go to trial, the argument is that they were going to inherit some millions of dollars.

They’d already gotten some money and been spending it, right?

Correct. In that time of them not being arrested, they live this lavish lifestyle. They go on a spending spree of cars and partying and all that.

One of them hired a tennis coach for a year for, like, thousands of dollars. It was outlandish.

Advertisement

That became the heart of the prosecution’s argument: This was about money. This was about wanting to live this lifestyle. Now, the defense made the argument that this is what California calls an imperfect self-defense.

What does that mean?

The best way to do it is to describe what self-defense is: So, I punch you; you punch me. You technically assaulted me, but because you have the defense of self-defense, that crime goes away completely. You are not guilty by reason of self-defense. An imperfect self-defense is when you have the subjective belief that you’re being attacked and need to use force. But objectively, it’s unreasonable. We as a society just say, “No, that doesn’t make sense.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

They were victims of sexual abuse, and while that might not be a perfect reason to kill your parents when they’re not currently in the act of sexually abusing you, they subjectively believed that they were in hell their entire lives, that they were in a war zone—similar to the way that we now understand people who go through PTSD, similar to the way that we understand how women go through what we used to call “battered women syndrome,” what we now call “intimate partner violence,” that they’re in a constant sense of fight or flight because of the sexual abuse that they’re subjected to in that household.

In the initial trial, did this argument work?

Advertisement

Advertisement

The way I’m arguing it to you now, I’m cheating in a sense, as I’m arguing it to you with the knowledge of what I understand and what we all accept in 2024. In 1993, this argument was not fully developed in a way that you would apply to young men just because of the way we talked about sexual abuse and assaults based on gender or who was in power and who was not.

We assumed a victim could only be a woman?

Exactly.

So how did that play out in the first trial?

Advertisement

The first trial, to their benefit, was a mistrial. The jurors were on the fence. They were hung. They couldn’t decide guilt or innocence. And that makes a very strong argument for their appeal now.

Advertisement

The brothers were tried again in 1995. This time, a jury found them guilty, and they were both sentenced to life in prison without the possibility for parole. But recently, a high-profile criminal defense attorney named Mark Geragos has stepped in to argue the brothers should be freed. Geragos has had a lot of celebrity clients over the last two decades: Winona Ryder, Chris Brown, Michael Jackson. In the early 2000s, he also defended Scott Peterson, a man who murdered his wife, Laci, when she was eight months pregnant.

The argument that Mark Geragos is making is that in the second trial far less evidence about the sexual abuse was allowed in by the judge. And thus, the defense had less of a defense. When you’re left without the sexual abuse—and we have family members who said that his household was like that—you only have these young men killed their parents and then bought all this lavish lifestyle stuff. The argument is that’s why they were convicted.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

It’s really hard to overstate how much this case took over the media landscape in the ’90s. I still remember this big Barbara Walters interview that the Menendez brothers did when they were in prison. They make the case they were abused by their father. But the takeaway moment was one brother saying, “I’m just a normal kid.” And then Barbara Walters interrupting him and saying, “Oh, Erik, you’re just a normal kid who killed your parents!” To me, it speaks to the fact that back in the ’90s the brothers didn’t do themselves a lot of favors in terms of their defense.

In law school we don’t really learn how to interact with the public through the media very well. That’s something that people are still learning today in 2024. I can’t really be too harsh on an attorney in 1989 to 1994, when O.J. Simpson was the first real criminal case where people were watching on TV, and the court of public opinion was just born.

Advertisement

You’re completely right: They probably didn’t do themselves any favors, but no one knew how to operate the court of public opinion.

Netflix isn’t the only reason for the renewed attention to this decades-old case. In 2023, a former member of the Puerto Rican boy band Menudo said that he had been drugged and raped as a teenager by the Lyle and Erik’s father, José Menendez. José had worked in the record industry for years.

And then, another piece of evidence emerged: a handwritten letter from teenaged Erik Menendez, to a cousin, alluding to his own abuse.

So when the brothers’ defense attorney, Mark Geragos, walked in to meet with the Los Angeles County district attorney last week, he was not just bringing nearly two dozen Menendez family members with him. He was also armed with a sworn affidavit from that boy band member and that long-buried letter, too.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Geragos is saying, We have this new information, and if this information was presented at the time of trial, it would have changed drastically the result of the trial or, at least, the sentencing. And this detention is unconstitutional for X and Y reasons based on this new evidence. That’s the hearing that’s going to happen to determine: Is this letter true? Is this affidavit correct? Are we going to give you a new trial? Are we going to resentence you? Or do nothing?

So a judge will decide?

Correct. Prosecutors recommend, judges decide.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Why is the Los Angeles DA even considering going back and opening up this case again and reconsidering the sentencing?

District attorneys are elected officials, and George Gascón is currently in the middle of an election that he seems to, by all accounts, be losing left, right, and center. So, there is a theory that maybe getting this case done will help him get reelected. I don’t think that’s going to happen, based on the timing of this all. But I can see why a person would say this is strictly political.

Advertisement

The other theory is he started, when he got into office, the resentencing unit, and a big feather in his cap is that there have been 300 resentencings and only four people who have reoffended. And so, maybe his legacy is at play here.

[Editor’s note: On Thursday, Los Angeles District Attorney George Gascón recommended the Menendez brothers’ life-without-parole sentences be thrown out and they be resentenced and immediately eligible for parole. A hearing before a judge will likely take place in the next month. If a judge agrees with Gascón’s recommendation, a parole board must approve the brothers’ release before Gov. Gavin Newsom signs off on the plan. All of that could take a few months.]

Advertisement

Advertisement

Subscribe to What Next on Apple Podcasts

Get more news from Mary Harris every weekday.

It strikes me that there are a lot of people who are wrongly imprisoned in this country. And very few of them are the subject of not one but two Netflix productions or a TikTok investigation. From the beginning, this case was all about privilege. Part of the reason why the Menendez brothers were convicted is because of their lavish spending spree after murdering their parents. Is their potential release about privilege too?

Absolutely. We only hear about the ones that hit the news. But there are so many cases of people who have been sentenced incorrectly, where evidence was not properly discovered, where it was not handed over, where defense attorneys and public defenders are screaming into the wind and trying to have people in similar situations have an ounce of what they’re receiving in terms of review of their case and consideration of the facts, especially in light of new scientific evidence or how we understand how trauma affects people. There are, unfortunately, far too many of those people who don’t get their story told.

But in having these cases, we tell the world that these exist. And I believe that when people know that this exists, they look out for it more. And when they see injustice, they speak about it more often, and we move to a more just place. I’m also maybe a blind optimist in that it’s moving in the right direction.
As Election Day 2024 nears, campaign observers are watching the major party presidential nominees, their running mates and their surrogates crisscross the nation, holding events in battleground states. The strategy is rooted in common sense: The race will likely be decided by voters in seven states, which is why the candidates and parties are so heavily focused on turning out their supporters in those states.

Texas, however, is not one of those states.

To be sure, recent polling suggests Donald Trump is leading Kamala Harris in the Lone Star State by roughly seven points, which is relatively competitive when compared to other reliably red states, but few sincerely believe that the Democratic ticket will win Texas’ 40 electoral votes.

So why is the Democratic vice president headed to the state with 11 days remaining before Election Day? Because of Texas’ significance in the larger national conversation about abortion rights and reproductive health care. NBC News reported:

Harris is scheduled to deliver a marquee address on reproductive freedom tonight in Houston, where she will be joined by women and men who have faced the consequences of state-level abortion bans since the fall of Roe v. Wade. ... Pop superstar Beyoncé is expected to perform at the event, too, according to a source familiar with the plans.

A Politico report added this week, “If you’re wondering why Harris would spend time in Texas — a state that hasn’t gone for a Democrat in a presidential election since 1976 — less than two weeks from Election Day, think less about the location and more about the national message.”

Quite right. This is about shining a light on one of the year’s most important issues, while reminding the nation about the consequences of Trump’s success in overturning Roe v. Wade and allowing Republican officials in multiple states to impose brutal restrictions. The New York Times added, “In short, the Harris team wants to put what happens deep in the heart of Texas on display for the whole country to see.”

Indeed, ahead of Harris’ event, the Democratic campaign unveiled a television ad focused on a Texas family that’s suffered as a direct result of a GOP-imposed abortion ban.

This will soon be followed by another new ad — titled “He Did It” — that will focus on Trump taking responsibility for the end of federal abortion protections.

What’s more, the vice president will be joined at the Houston rally by, among many others, Amanda and Josh Zurawski, whose tragic experiences have been an important part of the Democratic Party’s messaging for months.

Harris will also be joined by Democratic Rep. Colin Allred, a former NFL star running a competitive campaign against Republican Sen. Ted Cruz. Watch this space.
Erie, Pennsylvania CNN —

For a Republican canvasser going door-to-door to get out the vote in the battleground state of Pennsylvania, the address on East Lake Road in Erie must have seemed like Heaven-sent evidence of the sort of widespread voter fraud many in his party have been complaining about since Donald Trump lost the election to Joe Biden in 2020.

There were 53 voters registered at the address, the site of a Catholic church, but not a single one actually living there, Cliff Maloney, a conservative operative and founder of The Pennsylvania Chase, claimed on X in a post that quickly went viral.

But there were voters at that address – dozens of them actually. Fifty-five hard-to-miss nuns of the Benedictine Sisters of Erie.

A so-called ballot chaser, who goes door-to-door encouraging voters to return their mail-in ballots, had somehow missed the packed parking lot and the bustling reception area where nuns shuffled between their simple living quarters and the impressive stained-glass windows in the chapel.

“We’re used to being accused of things like being too active. And we’ve always been very vocal about peace and justice,” Sister Annette Marshall told CNN in an interview Thursday. “But I’ve never heard us accused of fraud. … Or not existing.”

The monastery has been in Erie since the 1850s and moved into their current building in 1969, in part financed by sisters who formed a real-life musical “Sister Act” group to raise funds. Most of the residents have lived there for decades and are deeply engaged with the community.

“We’ve been in Erie since 1856 doing good work. These sisters don’t deserve to be put down by some misinformation that we’re a sham, that we’re a fraud,” said the prioress, Sister Stephanie Schmidt.

Maloney heads a group that encourages Republicans to vote by mail and is part of a larger, often coordinated network of conservatives who cast doubts on the security of the election, suggesting widespread fraud in mail ballots, sharing uncorroborated stories of machines changing votes and urging voters to be alert and document suspected wrongdoing.

Evidence for their concerns, however, remains as thin as it was in the 2020 election and local officials are actively trying to combat the flurry of false and misleading claims – like Maloney’s – that spread like wildfire on social media.

In a social media post on Thursday night, Pennsylvania Secretary of State Al Schmidt said he spoke with Sister Schmidt to thank her for standing up to election disinformation.

Maloney did not respond to CNN’s request for comment.

‘People can vote for whoever they want to vote for, but don’t lie’

In two weeks, all eyes will be on Erie County, one of only two true swing counties in the most consequential swing state in the country. Barack Obama won the county in 2008 and 2012, but Trump won Erie in 2016, followed by a victory for Biden in the northern-most Pennsylvania county in 2020.

The town has seen nonstop campaigning from both parties this election cycle.

“It’s intense,” said Sister Schmidt, 72. But even though she urges her flock to vote, the Benedictine Sisters are a nonpartisan organization. They don’t endorse a party or candidate. “Each Sister votes their conscience,” she said.

Sister Stephanie Schmidt speaks during an interview with CNN, in Erie, Pennsylvania. CNN

Some, like Sister Diane Rabe, have already mailed in their ballot. Others are planning to vote on Election Day despite their busy schedules.

Because the Benedictine Sisters don’t sit still.

Many of them were teachers or social workers in their younger days and have taken full-time jobs at the monastery since retiring. Sister Marshall, now in her 80s, is heading the climate change ministry for the Church and is in charge of hundreds of oblates, people affiliated with the monastic community. Another sister, also in her 80s, took over the hospitality ministry after 35 years of working for the food bank.

The nuns are mostly in good health – Sister Theresa Zoky, the flock’s personal historian and archivist, took a tumble at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport a few weeks ago and rolls around in a wheelchair while her leg heals – but all are alive and eligible to vote.

According to a text message Maloney posted to X, the canvasser went inside the monastery and was told that nobody lives there. But none of the sisters who worked the front desk remember ever seeing or talking to a political canvasser, according to the congregation’s communications director, Sister Linda Romey.

“No sister is going to tell him that,” Sister Diane Cook said. “If he went up to the reception desk and asked about who lived here, they’d probably hand him a list of all the sisters that live here.”

“We’re not a group that’s just going to let them walk all over us like that,” said Sister Cook.

“People can vote for whoever they want to vote for, but don’t lie,” she added.

Conspiracy theories lay the groundwork for post-election challenges

A high volume of mail-in and absentee voting in key swing states like North Carolina, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Nevada has already prompted a wave of Republican-led lawsuits challenging everything from whether mail-in ballot envelopes are properly sealed to whether they are postmarked correctly, laying the groundwork for potential challenges to the election.

Conservatives like Maloney recognize the Democratic lead over mail-in votes and see an opportunity. If Trump could get 33% of the mail-in votes, Maloney told long-time Republican operative Roger Stone on a podcast earlier this month, “he cannot lose because Republican turnout models are off the charts.”

Maloney launched his operation at the start of 2024 with the aim to knock on half a million doors in Pennsylvania and increase Republican mail-in ballot rates.

In recent weeks, Republican grassroots efforts in swing states like Pennsylvania have been amplified by Elon Musk who has put his finger – and wallet – on the scale for Trump.

America PAC, largely funded by the Tesla founder, and Turning Point Action joined forces in Wisconsin earlier this month, deploying hundreds of paid “ballot chasers.”

When Maloney claimed the nuns in Erie were engaged in voter fraud, America PAC retweeted the post, further elevating the false statement.

While most of the Benedictine Sisters don’t keep up with social media, they understand its power – especially during an election – and made a public call for Maloney “to account for his blatantly false post.”

Maloney acknowledged the controversy on X.

“If the 53 people registered at this address are legal voters… then I encourage them to participate in their right to vote,” Maloney posted.

But for the sisters, that is not enough.

“All they’d have to do is say, ‘We’re sorry. What we said wasn’t true.’ And we could say, ‘OK.’ And that would be the end of it. But they’ll never do that,” said Sister Cook.

That said, Maloney is always welcome to visit.

“I’d like to get him out here and show him the house and get him to understand what the community does, what we’re a part of,” Sister Cook said, “because obviously he doesn’t know.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

CLARKSTON, Ga. ― A DJ spun banger after banger. President Barack Obama warmed up the crowd. Rock legend Bruce Springsteen sang and played guitar. And Kamala Harris played lead vocals at a packed college football field in the Atlanta suburbs on Thursday, firing up thousands of people into a joyous frenzy just days before the November presidential election in one of the country’s most crucial swing states.

Harris supporters sang, danced and swag surfed along to soul and hip-hop jams at her first rally featuring a musical performance, a day before none other than superstar Beyoncé is set to headline another event for the vice president in Texas. Top celebrities, including Samuel L. Jackson, Spike Lee and Tyler Perry, also spoke on her behalf as the smell of barbecue and Mexican burritos wafted out from half a dozen food trucks parked on the football field.

Advertisement

“We know how to throw a party,” Atlanta native Angelina Noble, 61, said as she grooved along to the music in the hot sun awaiting the show to begin.

Bruce Springsteen warned that Donald Trump "is running to be an American tyrant" after performing at a Kamala Harris rally on Thursday in Georgia. DREW ANGERER/AFP via Getty Images

Thursday’s rally couldn’t have sounded more different from a typical Donald Trump event, where dark and racist rhetoric is often paired with joyful anthems like ‘Y.M.C.A.’ by the Village People and where the GOP presidential nominee himself sometimes does nothing but sway and dance onstage, as he did for 40 minutes during a strange town hall earlier this month in Pennsylvania. His playlist was tuned to a much older generation and included songs like Schubert’s “Ave Maria,” and others from Sinead O’Connor, Elvis Presley and Guns N’ Roses.

But Trump is also amping up the theatrics in the closing days of the race, including speaking at a packed rally in nearby Duluth, Georgia, on Wednesday night that featured country music star Jason Aldean, a pyrotechnic display and concert lighting. And his campaign has announced a rally at New York City’s legendary Madison Square Garden this weekend, where special guests are expected as well.

Advertisement

Still, the celebrity-filled rally shows how Democrats, in the closing weeks of an ultra-tight presidential race where Georgia and six other states remain up for grabs, are trying to counter Trump’s raucous rallies in a way they simply did not in 2020, when they had an older candidate in now-President Joe Biden, and many liberal voters were wary of the coronavirus pandemic and did not want to gather in large crowds.

It wasn’t all fun at Harris’ rally on Thursday, however. The program was full of dire warnings about a potential second Trump term and mentions of what his former aides and top generals have said in recent weeks about their former boss, including that he fits the mold of a fascist who praised Adolf Hitler’s generals and who denigrates service members as suckers and losers.

“Trump is running to be an American tyrant,” Springsteen warned between solo renditions of “The Promised Land” and “Dancing in the Dark.”

Harris ticked off a long list of Trump’s misdeeds and said that he has become “more confused, more unstable, and more angry every day.”

A Harris campaign official said that 23,000 people gathered to hear from her at a football stadium in Clarkston, Georgia. DREW ANGERER/AFP via Getty Images

Advertisement

“He has become increasingly unhinged,” she added. “Last time at least there were people around him who could control him. They’re not with him this time. Just this week America heard from John Kelly, a retired general and one of Trump’s chiefs of staff, who said that as president, Trump praised Adolf Hitler. That Trump said Hitler ‘did some good things.’”

“This is not 2016 again and it’s not 2020,” she added, prompting one man in the crowd to scream “fascist.”

Obama, meanwhile, took aim at Black men in a nod to some polls suggesting lower enthusiasm among Black voters in this election compared with his own presidential campaign.

“People who think Trump’s behavior is somehow a sign of strength, I’m here to tell you, that is not what real strength is. It never has been,” Obama said to a roar from the crowd. “Real strength is about helping people who need it, and standing up to those who can’t always stand up for themselves.”

The former president questioned Trump’s competence as he did at a rally for Harris in Madison, Wisconsin, earlier this week, where he mocked his successor for swaying at his musical town hall in Pennsylvania. “You’d be worried if grandpa was acting like this,” Obama said Thursday.

Advertisement

Addressing Trump’s reported praise for the German dictator, he said, “A good rule of thumb is: Don’t say you want to do anything like Hitler.”

There does appear to be some strategy to the fun. The Harris campaign has done extensive research into what celebrities and politicians are best positioned to deliver the campaign’s closing arguments to different demographics. A survey from Blueprint, a centrist Democratic group, found that Jackson ― who shared that he and Harris share the same favorite swear word ― was the most-liked celebrity among male registered voters.

“Her favorite curse word is a favorite of mine, too,” the actor said. “I ain’t gonna say that word,” he added playfully, eliciting a round of laughter from the crowd. “I don’t know about you, but that’s the kind of president I can stand behind,” he added.

Former President Barack Obama holds hands with Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, at the Atlanta area rally. DREW ANGERER/AFP via Getty Images

Rallygoers expressed cautious optimism about Harris’ chances in Georgia, which flipped blue, for President Joe Biden, in 2020 for the first time in decades, saying they hoped America would side with good morals and character in this election.

Advertisement

“He’s always magical for me,” Noble said of Obama. “I didn’t vote for him just because he was Black. I voted for him because he showed me good character and good leadership. And that’s also why I’m voting for Kamala.”

Tanika Vincent, a Spanish teacher from Atlanta, told HuffPost she felt invigorated by Harris’ event, which was her first-ever political rally.

“Of course, the celebrity star power was top-notch, but what I loved was the message of inclusivity and just getting back to common sense in America,” Vincent said.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Biden offers apology for 'horrific era' of U.S. Native American boarding schools

toggle caption Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images

President Biden on Friday formally apologized for the federal government's Native American boarding schools, calling it a "horrific era" in the nation's history.

“The federal government has never, never formally apologized for what happened. I formally apologize as president of the United States of America for what we did,” he told Native American tribes and others gathered at the Gila Crossing Community School at the Gila River Indian Community outside Phoenix. “It’s long overdue.”

The U.S. government ran more than 400 schools that for over 150 years separated tens of thousands of American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian children from their parents in order to assimilate them, and exposing them to abuse or even death. Biden said most Americans do not know about the government's role in one of the "most horrific chapters in American history."

Sponsor Message

A report from the Interior Department found at least 973 children died in the schools. The Interior Department report also called for an official apology, among other recommendations.

The White House press secretary said the apology, which comes less than two weeks before Election Day, was part of Biden's legacy. Biden used the speech to talk about what it means to be American, and how it's important to acknowledge both the good and bad parts of U.S. history.

“We do not erase history,” Biden said during the Friday speech. “We remember so we can heal as a nation.”

"Native voter wall"

The timing of the visit — and the apology — comes ahead of Election Day, as Vice President Harris is locked in what appears in a tight presidential contest against former President Donald Trump. The Gila River reservation, which is home to the O’odham and Pee-Posh people, partly sits within the boundaries of Maricopa County — one of the counties that may decide the results of the 2024 presidential race.

As Election Day draws closer, Democrats are hoping Native voters in key swing states like Arizona help secure the White House. Harris has won endorsements from the leaders of at least 17 of the 22 federally recognized tribes — including the Gila River Indian Community. Other Indigenous tribes have published voter guides that lean Democratic on candidate information .

“We talk about the Blue Wall, but there is a Native voter wall,” said Gila River Indian Community Gov. Stephen Roe Lewis. The Blue Wall refers to the states in the Midwest like Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin that have traditionally supported Democrats but are now considered swing states. Lewis noted the significant Native voters in key states like Arizona, Montana and Wisconsin.

“These very well could determine the results up and down the ballot in these razor-thin races," he said.

toggle caption ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS/AFP via Getty Images

Biden will use the visit to discuss his administration’s record “delivering for tribal communities,” including keeping the promise for the visit, the White House said.

Sponsor Message

Republicans seized on the timing of the Arizona trip as a political gambit from the White House, as they also seek to appeal to Indigenous voters.

"A visit from Joe Biden to the Native American community with less than two weeks before an election is nothing more than a photo op," said Halee Dobbins, the Republican National Committee's communications director in Arizona, saying Republican policies would better support that community.



Not the first high-profile visit

Harris and her running mate Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz both held events earlier this month on Gila River land, with an introduction from Lewis.

Arizona is broadly home to over 200,000 voting-age Native Americans, and voting advocates and political parties have been working all year to turn out their vote.

Over the past few months, the Harris campaign has ramped up their efforts to court Native American voters. The campaign has boasted having the most “expansive” effort to mobilize Native Democrats by hiring over 20 staff members dedicated to reaching the state’s 22 federally recognized tribes and buying ads throughout the election via tribal media.

Walz is already preparing to head back to visit Arizona’s tribal members. Just after Biden leaves, the vice presidential candidate will arrive in Window Rock, the capital of the Navajo Nation, which stretches from Arizona into New Mexico and a bit of Utah.

Former President Donald Trump also visited the state on Thursday, though he has yet to visit Native American communities specifically.
writes about pop culture, media, and ethics. Before joining Vox in 2016, they were a staff reporter at the Daily Dot. A 2019 fellow of the National Critics Institute, they’re considered an authority on fandom, the internet, and the culture wars.

In 2015, when President Barack Obama appeared on Marc Maron’s WTF podcast, it was a big event precisely because it was a one-off — an exception rather than a rule. Almost a decade later, the media landscape has changed so completely that independent podcasters with little if any journalism experience seem to have an easier time getting a sit-down with presidential candidates than major news outlets do.

Rumors have swirled of a Kamala Harris interview with Joe Rogan, the godfather of politicized “apolitical” podcasters. While Harris reportedly couldn’t make that appearance work, a Rogan sit-down with Donald Trump was confirmed this week, quickly followed by a new report that Harris will appear on football icon Shannon Sharpe’s podcast Club Shay Shay. Hard on the heels of that report came the news that Harris would also be a guest on Brené Brown’s popular relationship podcast Unlocking Us. These are all moves signaling that the role of these independent agents in the media ecosystem has become more significant than ever.

The blitz of Joe Everyman podcasts that Trump has done on the campaign trail has turned heads, from Impaulsive to Bussin’ With the Boys, as has Harris’s recent appearance on the Call Her Daddy podcast and Democratic vice presidential candidate Tim Walz’s appearance on the SmartLess podcast. What these podcasters have in common — besides scoring conversations with the people vying for the White House — is that they’re nonchalantly normie. As much as a “middle” still exists in America, you can find it among this lot, a good chunk of whom claim to avoid politics, even if they can’t help stumbling into political topics.

Many of them are comedians and entertainers by profession, and few of them have worked in traditional newsrooms. They don’t all claim to be particularly well-informed about any topic on offer, and many are, at best, just casually invested in learning: Witness Theo Von’s August interview with Trump, in which he brought up serious topics, mainly the opioid epidemic, but without anything substantive to say about them. The former Road Rules star wasn’t exactly equipped to push back against any of Trump’s positions.

Call Her Daddy’s host Alex Cooper did stick mainly to substantive issues during Harris’s interview, but she was apologetic about it, reminding her audiences that she typically avoids politics “because I want Call Her Daddy to be a place where everyone feels comfortable tuning in.” The apolitical stance extends to booking as well; though no podcast has yet hosted both candidates, multiple podcasters, including Cooper and Von, have stated that they have invited both candidates to come on their shows.

What, then, explains the politicians’ efforts to reach these podcast audiences? Their listener numbers, typically in the low millions, may seem small, but they’re not as small as you think. They not only rival a traditional audience of, say, 60 Minutes’ 6 million viewers, but also represent loyal listeners likely to be influenced by the podcast appearance. Still, there’s even more at work here. Let’s look at the podcasters themselves.

The podcasters

Adin Ross, streamer

How many people are tuning in? 1.5 million Kick subscribers; 2.6 million YouTube views

Who is he? Adin Ross is a notorious video game streamer. Earlier this year, out of what he indicated to Theo Von was a wish to please his sons, Trump sat down with a ring of podcasters known for covering UFC fandom. Trump has also done appearances with a range of nontraditional right-wing pundits including YouTubers and radio hosts, as has JD Vance, but the UFC circuit clearly gained him the most attention — despite very little discussion of wrestling. While all of these UFC hosts have some degree of controversy, the dubious prize for amplifying Trump most directly to the “manosphere” arguably goes to Adin Ross.

Last year, reportedly after years of flirting with being canceled, Ross was finally permanently banned from Twitch for homophobic slurs and other offensive comments. Known for hobnobbing with Andrew Tate and promoting toxic masculinity and white supremacists, Ross retreated to rival platform Kick, of which he now owns 30 percent. Though Kick is relatively niche — with 1.5 million subscribers, Ross is the platform’s biggest account — his sit-down with Trump was also cross-posted to Ross’s YouTube channel, where it’s picked up another 2.6 million views in the two months since it aired. (Ross, who’s also a fan of Elon Musk, thanked Trump for his drop-in by ... gifting him a Cybertruck.)

Logan Paul’s Impaulsive podcast, also streaming on YouTube

How many people are tuning in? Lots of podcast listeners; 4.7 million YouTube subscribers; 6.6 million views

Who is he? A former YouTube prankster and vlogger alongside his brother Jake, Logan Paul is best known for blowing up his enormously successful career with one 2018 video in which he notoriously filmed a dead body in Japan’s Aokigahara Forest. He subsequently embarked on an impressively successful redemption arc; Impaulsive, a conversational weekly podcast and YouTube stream with Paul, his co-hosts, and guests, has arguably played the biggest role in rehabilitating his former immature image into something approaching respectability. It’s currently reportedly ranked in the top 50 podcasts across all platforms. His chat with Trump was conversational, if not particularly enlightening; the pair discussed everything from aliens (Trump thinks they might exist) to AI; the deepest issue was arguably a debate about whether Mike Tyson is too old to box.

Theo Von

How many people are tuning in? A whole lot of podcast listeners; 3.2 million YouTube subscribers; 14 million views

Who is he? The most prominent of the UFC trio, Theo Von’s This Past Weekend is reportedly in the Spotify top 20, as well as among the top 10 podcasts across all platforms nationally. Von, a former MTV reality regular turned stand-up comic turned podcaster, has only gotten bigger since his interview with Trump. The event generated a massively viral clip of Trump speculating about drug use and has since racked up a non-paltry 14 million views. Von reportedly reached out to Kamala Harris for an interview as well; he’s also since interviewed Trump’s running mate JD Vance, including an extensive conversation about Vance’s family’s struggles with addiction. He also interviewed Bernie Sanders in August.

Andrew Schulz, Flagrant

How many people are tuning in? 1.77 million YouTube subscribers; 4.5 million views

Who is he? One of many standup comics-turned-podcasters on the list, Schulz is another comedian who, like fellow Trump interviewer Von, purports to be apolitical but nurses contrarian anti-woke takes. Another MTV alum, he co-hosts the Flagrant podcast with fellow comedian Akaash Singh; he also co-hosts the Brilliant Idiots podcast with Charlamagne tha God, who recently interviewed Harris.

It’s Trump’s erratic interview on Flagrant, which has garnered 4.5 million views in a week, that’s gotten much of the recent attention. Trump discussed the two recent assassination attempts made against him, implying at one point that both shooters may have been working with other people, including nefarious foreign entities like Iran. The rest of the interview mainly served as fodder for Schulz to make jokes and contributed little else substantive to the conversation. That didn’t stop Schulz from facing backlash; the Brooklyn Academy of Music promptly canceled an appearance by Schulz in response to the platforming of Donald Trump.

Charlamagne tha God and The Breakfast Club

How many people are tuning in? More than 4 million morning radio listeners in over 80 markets; IHeartRadio has over 860 livestream stations nationwide

Who is he? Among the podcasters on this list, Charlamagne tha God is arguably the one who represents traditional media, albeit of the pop culture variety. The longtime comedian first gained his following through his association with Wendy Williams and VH1. He and Schulz were regulars on MTV’s Guy Code before they joined forces on The Brilliant Idiots. Charlamagne’s real claim to fame, however, is his longtime gig as host for the syndicated New York-based morning radio show The Breakfast Club, a staple of 2010s radio that has branched into a podcast network and a YouTube channel.

The Breakfast Club, like many of the entrants on this list, clearly muddies the waters between radio show, YouTube stream, and podcast, but the show’s expanding mediums seem crucial to its longevity. The show, which was inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame in 2020, is known for featuring high-profile celebrity interviews, and Kamala Harris was no exception: She recently did a special “Audio Town Hall” with The Breakfast Club, streamed out of Detroit on the IHeart radio network and hosted by Charlamagne. Charlamagne and Harris candidly agreed that Donald Trump is a fascist — a statement you’re unlikely to hear coming from a more traditional interview platform.

Alex Cooper, Call Her Daddy podcast

How many people are tuning in? A megaton; it’s the No. 4 podcast in the US

Who is she? Per NPR, woman-centered podcast Call Her Daddy boasts an even split between Democrats and Republicans, mostly white. The rare host that’s on the cusp of Gen Z, creator Alex Cooper created her podcast with her roommate just a year after she graduated from college, whereupon it was promptly acquired by Barstool Sports and catapulted to popularity. (Cooper exited Barstool in 2021.) Though Cooper currently has all the attention for the recent Harris interview, which focused mainly on reproductive freedom and health care for women, she’s already onto a bigger catch: interviewing Taylor Swift.

How many people are tuning in? Plenty; it’s one of the most popular sports podcasts in the US with 545k subscribers and 391k views on YouTube

Who are they? Former Tennessee Titans turned besties turned podcasters, hosts Will Compton and Taylor Lewan have made a name for themselves among sports audiences with this conversational Barstool Sports podcast.

Though it wasn’t about sports, they scored Donald Trump’s longest interview yet; he nattered for over two hours last week, chatting about everything from politics to Elon Musk and social media. He even discussed doing all these podcasts, telling Compton and Lewan that the new crop of podcasters are “young guys and they’re very different in some cases.”

“It may have to do with all of my sons. They’re young ... This is a young world ... I’ve done a few of them and they’ve done well.”

Joe Rogan, The Joe Rogan Experience

How many people are tuning in: Legions; Rogan has been the most-listened-to podcast in the country for nearly a decade and currently has over 30 million subscribers between YouTube and Spotify.

Who is he? Yet another standup comic slash reality TV star turned podcaster, Rogan made it big in the podcast industry by embracing the medium early and being incredibly prolific, churning out hours of content weekly. His fans praise what they view as his down-to-earth, moderate style, but he balances that out with plenty of controversy.

Shannon Sharpe, Club Shay Shay

How many people are tuning in? 3.6 million YouTube subscribers and lots of podcast listeners; as of 2024, it’s the No. 11 podcast in the country.

Who is he? Former Denver Bronco, NFL Hall of Famer, and veteran sports broadcaster Shannon Sharpe started Club Shay Shay in 2020 when he was still perhaps best known as a morning show host on Fox. Last year, however, he transitioned his podcast to a new network and got a new gig with ESPN, which may have helped launch Club Shay Shay into the upper echelon of the podcast industry. Despite inadvertently recently livestreaming a sexual encounter to shocked followers, Sharpe hasn’t lost his appeal: Kamala Harris will reportedly tape an interview with him to be broadcast on October 28.

Brené Brown, Unlocking Us with Brené Brown

How many people are tuning in? Plenty; it’s reportedly the No. 1 relationship podcast on Apple Podcasts.

Who is she? A noted shame researcher, Brown is the only academic in this motley podcast crew (and the only one to date whose podcast is hosted on the Vox Media network). Brown first gained widespread public attention in 2010, when her TED Talk on vulnerability went massively viral. Since then she’s published multiple bestselling books, done a Netflix special, and maintained a role as a professor — but it’s her ongoing podcast Unlocking Us that’s cemented her position as the nation’s premier relationship adviser.

Brown’s position on this list isn’t without a touch of irony. In 2022, numerous artists and entertainers blacklisted Spotify in protest against its lucrative deal with Joe Rogan, as a response to Rogan’s platforming of Covid-19 misinformation (and many other perceived sins). Among them, briefly, was Brown, who put both of the active podcasts she had on the platform at the time on hiatus, only to later unpause them and declare, “I’m not interested in canceling or silencing or censoring anyone, including Joe Rogan. This was not, nor has it ever been, framed to the public or to Spotify as ‘me or Joe.’” If, however, Harris chooses to skip Rogan and turn to Brown instead, Brown’s podcast audience, which, per the New York Times, is large and dominated by women, could be the deciding influence of the election.

Podcasts are where the people are

In a post-pandemic culture where parasocial relationships have grown more frequent and intense, podcasts have become more important than ever. They’re right in people’s ears, offering a uniquely intimate form of connection, not only to the hosts but to the events and ideas they’re platforming. They’re transforming the way audiences learn about issues of the day, keeping them engaged and (sort of) aware; the public’s love of podcasting just keeps growing, with audiences expanding, getting younger, and listening longer and more frequently. The medium, once relegated to extremely online audiences with niche interests, has gradually become more mainstream and wide-reaching; 42 percent of Americans over age 12 listened to a podcast in the last month, and that number is only going up.

Conversely, the public’s trust in media keeps plunging lower across the ideological spectrum: Less than a third of Americans say they have confidence in the accuracy of traditional news mediums, and the number of adults getting their news from actual news sources keeps declining year over year. Podcasts are able to reach audiences that have given up on traditional media, even as the line between podcasters and journalists gets blurry and the boundaries between mediums get fuzzier. The convergence of digital media with the creator economy and vice versa has created whole new submodes of influencers, from the kind that siphon and recycle other sorts of content to the kind that exist entirely as hot takes on TikTok.

Increasingly, journalists with a proper newsroom background, like internet culture reporter Taylor Lorenz and Vox co-founder Matt Yglesias, have traded their former jobs for autonomy, independence, and loyal fan followings. Traditional reporters are also Substack influencers, while podcasts are also livestreams on Twitch and/or videos on YouTube and TikTok. All of this is causing seismic rifts and ever more unreliable journalism in a media environment in which the public already distrusts the media. As the popularity of podcasts keeps growing, these interviews with major public figures arguably add a patina of unearned prestige and importance, even as professional media outlets take hit after hit. In this messier media landscape, it’s easy to see why so many of these podcasters have so much sway with their audiences — and why politicians might want to tap into that.

That accessibility is a double-edged sword, however, since most of these podcasters lack editorial oversight. Without a journalism background, podcasters often aren’t the best people to critique or fact-check their guests, especially high-profile ones. Creators of all kinds prioritize personality and charm over journalistic rigor and information; as with the medium itself, the delineation between what matters for what reason has broken down. Still, audiences don’t often care; the bar for podcast media is lower, and audience expectations for podcasters to be “journalists” in the traditional sense are largely nonexistent. Podcasters like Von often benefit from a rough-and-ready style that allows them to contrast themselves with stodgy traditional media.

It’s not that the candidates are completely eschewing traditional media; Harris’s press parade has included a wide range of other outlets and interviewers, including legacy media, like her recent NBC News interview, as well as several that aren’t particularly politically focused, like veteran “shock jock” Sirius host Howard Stern, who endorsed her. Trump also recently did an interview with Bloomberg’s business podcast, while Tim Walz sat down for an interview with The Ezra Klein Show for the New York Times; Trump running mate JD Vance has likewise been hitting both traditional and non-traditional media hard.

The podcast format (alongside its increasingly indistinguishable twin, the livestream) seems to matter more and more. Vulture noted that Trump’s combined appearances on Schulz’s and Von’s podcasts have dwarfed the paltry views Harris received for her appearance on Call Her Daddy, despite the latter show reportedly being the most popular podcast among women on Spotify. (Her appearance on The View seems to have done better, an indication that older audiences still matter.) Still, Harris’s appearance on Call Her Daddy proved controversial among her constituents, while Trump’s appearances on a broad litany of dudebro podcasts have gone relatively unremarked upon — even though the latter are arguably demonstrably influencing a generation of voters.

That lack of pushback against Trump’s interview choices may also reflect the increasingly decentralized media landscape, where “influence” is more nebulous and subjective than ever while simultaneously becoming more microtargeted and intense. A podcaster like Cooper or Von may reach a fraction of the audience of 60 Minutes, but the kinds of viewers they reach aren’t likely to be found watching the news. As Vulture’s Nick Quah observes, “We’ve long arrived at a place where Americans, now polarized beyond recognition, prefer news sources that align with their ideology, if they even consume much news at all ... In those arenas, hosts don’t care about executing ‘good’ or challenging interviews in the classic journalistic sense. The interview just has to make sense to their audience.”

That also means that interviews no longer push candidates to reckon with serious, even unpleasant or difficult topics. The kinds of questions that identify a strong leader, as opposed to one who’s merely affable and interviews well, aren’t very likely to arise on a UFC podcast. But that’s also something candidates may prefer; after all, who wants to deal with hard-hitting questions from journalists when they could field softballs from everyday citizens who aren’t backed by a team of editors and fact-checkers? These interviews are easy, fun, and personable, which also might be a welcome alternative to moderated, issue-focused debates — even if they’re a disservice to voters.

That’s the unfortunate downside to all of this: No matter how you spin it, these interviews are a poor substitute for journalistic rigor, accountability, and editorial oversight. They may arguably even be a hindrance to democracy in an age where it faces multiple existential threats. We typically expect our leaders and experts to be better than the public at understanding and dealing with such enormous problems and dire realities. Yet increasingly, our leaders and experts are being replaced by self-appointed influencers with no actual expertise. The result is a bleak, livestreamed morass: Even if we’re fond of the voices reaching us through the void, we’re still all fumbling in the dark.

Update, October 25, 2:50 pm: This story, originally published October 25, has been updated with the news that Harris will appear on Brené Brown’s podcast and won’t be appearing on Rogan’s.
This article is the fourth in a five-part series called “Protecting the Election.” As former President Donald Trump and many of his allies refuse to concede his defeat in the 2020 election, this MSNBC Daily series brings election law and policy experts to explore the many threats to certifying election results at both the state and national levels.

Since democracy’s inception, elections have served as its safeguard. And since the dawn of time, there have been emergencies: severe weather events, natural disasters, terrorist attacks and pandemics. The two have inevitably intersected.

Natural disasters do not wait for election season to end.

New York City voters began the morning of Sept. 11, 2001, at the polls for a mayoral primary. The mass displacement and widespread devastation of Hurricane Katrina caused municipal elections, scheduled five months after the storm, to be postponed an additional two months. In 2008, tornadoes ravaged the Southeast on Super Tuesday. Superstorm Sandy hit the Northeast just eight days before the 2012 presidential election. And now, hurricanes Helene and Milton have devastated Florida, Georgia and North Carolina, weeks before Election Day.

Natural disasters do not wait for election season to end. In fact, hurricane season and general election season invariably overlap. But even in the face of unexpected emergencies, leaders and election officials are prepared. In addition to the general gubernatorial emergency powers, almost every state has passed laws governing permissible changes to election administration in the case of an emergency.

For example, Alabama enables the secretary of state to authorize absentee voting for all eligible voters affected by an emergency. New York allows for an additional voting day if a disaster causes turnout to fall below 25%. Texas temporarily waives voter ID requirements for those who lose their IDs due to a disaster. Ohio provides election officials with broad discretion to move polling places during emergencies. Missouri authorizes the secretary of state to allow voters to return completed absentee ballots by fax during declared emergencies. None of these laws permits a complete overhaul of established election security measures. Instead, they provide guarded flexibility to ensure that vulnerable individuals affected by disasters can still be empowered voters.

Following Superstorm Sandy in 2012, leaders adapted election administration procedures to the needs of affected communities, highlighting the need for election contingency planning that many states have since responded to and adopted. New Jersey leaders addressed election issues that arose due to Sandy’s impact by extending the deadline for mail-in ballot requests, ordering election offices to remain open over the weekend before Election Day, and lifting restrictions on polling place locations. The measures New Jersey implemented to protect voter accessibility post-Sandy did not lead to significant changes in how people vote or how votes are counted. Instead, they encouraged states to develop election contingency plans that empower election officials to respond appropriately to emergencies.

North Carolina and Florida officials have already exercised these emergency powers and taken decisive steps to prevent interruption of the upcoming election. In North Carolina, immediate assessments of elections infrastructure in the western part of the state proved dire: county election offices closed; hundreds, if not thousands, of absentee ballots lost; and early voting and Election Day polling sites destroyed.

Decisions about how to help displaced voters are ultimately made on a state-by-state basis.

These challenges prompted a bipartisan State Board of Elections to adopt a resolution with eight measures to help voters and election officials in 13 counties across western North Carolina. Two days after the board adopted the resolution, the state legislature unanimously codified its measures and expanded its scope to cover 12 additional counties. The governor signed the bill the next day. North Carolina’s disaster relief bill allocates $5 million to the State Board of Elections. It also gives county election boards the authority to add, remove and relocate polling places, and permits voters to return an absentee ballot in a county other than the one in which they are registered during the early voting period.

But decisions about how to help displaced voters are ultimately made on a state-by-state basis. In the wake of hurricanes Helene and Milton, help isn’t always being offered, perhaps a reflection of the politically divisive time we live in.

South Carolina voters were given eight additional days to register to vote after Helene struck their state.

Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp declined to extend the deadline for voter registration after Helene hit as a Category 2 storm just seven days before voter registration ended. Voters went to court in Georgia to seek relief, but a federal judge refused to enter an emergency order that would have given people whose lives were disrupted additional time to register. That lawsuit will continue, but as a practical matter, denying emergency relief means it’s too late for Georgia voters who were prevented from registering by the storm, and voter registration usually accelerates in Georgia in that final week.

A judge in Florida denied a similar request made by the League of Women Voters, after Helene hit and as the state was preparing for Milton to come ashore. The plaintiffs argued that people obeying mandatory evacuation shouldn’t have to choose between their safety and their right to vote after Gov. Ron DeSantis refused to extend the registration period. But the judge said he didn’t see why people couldn’t take 10 minutes to fill out registration forms while they were evacuating and refused to order additional time for Florida voters to register. A local paper reported that the judge said he hoped that didn’t sound “insensitive.”

What would happen if a disaster — another hurricane, since the season doesn’t end until Nov. 30, or flooding or fires — were to interfere on Election Day?

In addition to state emergency laws, contingency plans and legislative action, courts can provide relief in emergency election situations. Courts can postpone or extend elections in some cases and might do so in a true emergency. Florida State University law professor Michael Morley, an expert on Election Day emergencies, has noted that while federal law sets presidential and congressional elections for the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, it allows postponement if necessary.

The Electoral Count Reform Act, passed in 2022 following the Jan. 6, 2021, assault on the U.S. Capitol, acknowledges that election periods may be modified for catastrophic “force majeure” events — unforeseen emergencies like weather that disrupts voting on Election Day. Predictably, there would be litigation if this happened, but emergencies, by definition, happen without warning at the most inopportune times.

Weather emergencies make one thing clear: States that have limited opportunities for in-person voting and restrictive rules for casting an absentee ballot are doing their citizens a disservice. Every state can add early voting, both in person and mail-in, and pass laws providing for extended voter registration periods following a weather emergency. It is a constitutional imperative to plan for election emergencies.

While hurricane season may end shortly after the election, the potential for weather emergencies to affect our elections won’t. We should heed the lessons of Helene, Milton and other disasters and develop rules and procedures at local, state and federal levels to ensure bipartisan action that guarantees the right to vote in the wake of disasters.

But for now, every registered voter who is able to should vote as soon as possible. Don’t wait for another weather emergency to strike.
Everyone seems to expect that Donald Trump will prematurely declare victory on election night, whether or not news organizations project him the winner. NBC’s Hallie Jackson even asked Kamala Harris about it during a Tuesday interview. Harris responded: “We will deal with election night and the days after as they come, and we have the resources and the expertise and the focus on that.”

But despite Harris’ assurances, and despite this country’s experience with Trump in 2020—when he declared, at a 2 a.m. press conference right after the election, “We did win this election,” before anyone had any idea whether Trump or Joe Biden had won—there are good reasons to believe that many of us are not prepared for what’s coming in the days after Nov. 5. We could well once again face a situation where Trump is ahead in the tally of announced results in key states such as Pennsylvania, only to see Harris declared the winner by the weekend after the election. The days after the election, as this potential “blue shift” materializes, could be fraught with disinformation, confusion, and even potential violence. It’s on the media, and all of us, not to let things spin out of control.

It is possible that Donald Trump simply wins election on election night in an Electoral College rout. If the razor-thin polls in seven battleground states are off by just a point or two in his direction, it could well be an early victory for Trump. But anything short of that is also possible, from a 2000 Bush v. Gore–type nail-biter, to a pattern more like 2020’s, when it took days to count ballots and determine that Joe Biden had decisively won the Electoral College battle, to a Harris blowout. None of these possibilities would be met with a gracious Trump concession or call for patience. No, it’s clear that Trump will declare he won or say there was cheating.

Advertisement

During our pandemic-laden 2020 elections, the public sphere was full of warnings about the blue shift (sometimes called the “red mirage”). Many more people were voting by mail in 2020 because it was safer, given COVID-19. Back then, Trump was falsely suggesting that mail ballots were laden with fraud, leading far fewer Republicans than Democrats to vote by mail. Results from in-person balloting are reported faster than votes by mail, because those mail ballots have to be checked for signatures and other measures taken to ensure they are acceptable. This meant that earlier reported ballot totals favored Republicans, and later totals Democrats. Add to that big Democratic cities taking longer to report their in-person results on election night than did redder, rural areas, with city results sometimes coming in in the middle of the night, in what Trump and his allies derisively called “ballot dumps.” At one point on election night, the totals reported in Pennsylvania, for example, showed Trump leading Biden by 700,000 votes, only to see Biden declared the winner days later by about 80,000 votes.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Well, déjà vu may be on tap for a week from Tuesday. Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, alone among the swing states, have not updated their laws to allow for the precanvassing (or processing) of mail ballots before Election Day, and they won’t start checking those ballots and preparing them for counting until Election Day itself. Republican legislatures in both states have blocked bipartisan proposals to update their laws to be more like Florida’s, where election officials can report most of their vote totals by the end of the night on election night. I suspect that some Republicans in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin have resisted making the change because uncertainty and the blue shift is a feature, not a bug: It allows for calling into question the legitimacy and fairness of the vote count if Democrats win.

Advertisement

So what can we do about all this? First, compared with 2020, there has been surprisingly little coverage of the upcoming blue shift. This is true even though Democrats, again, are much more likely than Republicans to vote by mail. (Republicans have transitioned this time to more in-person early voting, and those results will be reported quickly.) The word needs to get out for people to have patience. Indeed, a new academic study reveals that prebunking—explaining why election results take time—can encourage public trust and confidence in election results.

Second, the media and others need to be careful with explaining the vote totals and the expected blue shift as the process unfolds. In order for us to have a fair and safe election in 2024, according to a report from an ideologically diverse group of experts convened by the Safeguarding Democracy Project at the UCLA School of Law, the messaging should not be that one candidate or the other is “in the lead.” Instead, the key framing is that the race is “too early to call.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related From Slate Are the Polls Frightening You? Read This! Read More

Along with that message, there need to be clear and transparent explanations from election officials about the expected timing of it all. When should we expect results from Detroit and Philadelphia and Atlanta? The more we know now, the more prepared everyone else will be.

Even with this improved messaging, expect a better-organized and better-financed effort this time around to sow doubts about election results on election night itself. The Washington Post reports that over 230 Republican candidates have cast doubt on the integrity of the upcoming elections. We will again see grainy videos, perhaps aided by A.I., purportedly showing fraud or ballot dumps or election workers messing with the count. We saw this in 2020, for example, with two Georgia election workers, Shaye Moss and her mother, Ruby Freeman; they successfully sued Rudy Giuliani for $150 million for falsely accusing them of election fraud. They have started proceedings to take control of his Manhattan penthouse and Yankee memorabilia to pay the judgment he owes. But those defamation suits won’t necessarily work in real time to deter bad actors.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The disinformation should be worse now. In 2020 Twitter had a robust trust and safety team policing election lies. This time around, Elon Musk has turned X into a cesspool of electoral disinformation, which he regularly shares with his 200 million followers as part of a much larger effort to elect Trump. Meta, meanwhile, stung by Republican political attacks on its trust and safety measures in 2020, has tried to retreat from politics on Facebook and its other products. There’s a ton that tech companies can do, but they likely won’t. Demoting political content won’t stop these platforms from being used to generate disinformation, spread it, and organize, as happened with the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Nor can we discount the potential for violence that could crop up in the period before news organizations have enough data on outstanding ballots to call the election one way or the other. U.S. government officials have said that Russia and Iran may themselves seek to foment violence, setting Americans against one another.

People are exhausted by politics. I don’t blame them. But many will be in for a rude awakening when they wake up on Nov. 6. The election may be too close to call, Donald Trump may again have declared victory, and the uncertainty of not knowing who the next president is for a few days may spawn much greater problems.
Vice President Kamala Harris’ Telemundo Noticias interview, which aired Wednesday night, was what could be the presidential candidate’s final pitch to the country’s 36.2 million eligible Latino voters, many of whom will help determine the winner in swing states like Pennsylvania, Arizona, Nevada, North Carolina, Michigan, Wisconsin and Georgia.

Her campaign must continue to respect the diversity of the Latino electorate and understand that she has to give such voters something more than the message that Trump is too extreme.

That final pitch started with a clear truth when Harris told Julio Vaqueiro that “I think of the Latino community in terms of the extraordinary ambition, the aspirations, the dreams that exist in the community, understanding it is not a monolith, but that, not unlike any other community, there are dreams and hopes but not necessarily always access to opportunity. And a lot of my agenda is about creating opportunity for people to succeed.”

She’s right that Latinos are not a monolith, and as I’ve long argued, they never have been. For Harris to win the White House, her campaign must continue to respect the ideological and geographical diversity of the Latino electorate and understand that she has to give such voters something more than the message that Donald Trump is too extreme for the community. Many Latinos already know that Trump is extreme, and for many of them, that’s the appeal. The voters who can be persuaded by Harris want to know that she has a vision that includes them and their well-being.

It’s most likely that her realization that she needs to make her vision plain prompted her to call herself a “pragmatist capitalist” in the Telemundo interview. Trump, with his typical fearmongering, has claimed that Harris would bring more socialism to Americans, a message that’s tailor-made to scare Latino voters from Cuba, Venezuela and Nicaragua.

But in the interview we saw Wednesday, Harris provided a hopeful economic business message that speaks directly to one of the country’s fastest-growing populations. According to data from the Small Business Administration, “Hispanics are the majority business owners of over 5 million firms, which employ nearly 3 million workers. According to the latest official data, Hispanic business owners represented 14.5% of business owners in 2022, a 13% increase from 2021.”

Harris has spent most of her truncated campaign emphasizing an “opportunity economy,” and her appearance Wednesday night on Telemundo was another example of her doing so. She told Vaqueiro, “I believe that we need a new generation of leadership in America that actively works with the private sector to build up the new industries of America, to build up small-business owners, to allow us to increase homeownership, to allow people and their families to build intergenerational wealth.”

Harris has made similar statements at other Latino-focused events, such as the Univision town hall two weeks ago, when she said, “I believe in the strength of the private sector to create jobs and to work with government to strengthen the economy. Part of my plan is to work with developers and builders to build 3 million more housing before the end of my first term.”

How is this message playing out with Latinos in swing states?

Two polls of Latino swing state voters released this week show mixed results but have some encouraging signs for Harris. It’s for this reason that the campaign’s last sprint to the finish line might be promising with Latino voters.

On Monday, the political advocacy group Voto Latino, which officially endorsed Harris in July after Joe Biden dropped out of the race, published the findings of a six-state poll of 2,000 likely Latino voters. The good news for Harris, according to the poll, is that 62% of respondents trust her more with the economy compared with the 37% who trust Trump more. In addition, Harris has a 35-percentage-point lead with Latinos ages 18-30, a 27-point lead with Latinos ages 30-39, a 40-point lead with non-college-educated Latinas and a 50-point lead with college-educated Latinas.

Two polls of Latino swing state voters released this week show mixed results but have some encouraging signs for Harris.

All that sounds positive for her campaign, but there’s other data that raises some concerns. With non-college-educated Latino men, she’s up only 10 points, and she’s up only 37 points with college-educated Latino men. If the idea of the Harris campaign is to expand the tent for victory, these margins are lower than they were for previous Democratic candidates. It might not be enough.

Harris made sure to say Wednesday night that she was aware of how her policies “would affect Latino men” and “what we need to do around building a strong economy that supports working people. Understanding that, for example, small-business people, small-business owners, don’t always have access to the capital.” It’s a position consistent with the Opportunity Agenda for Black Men plan her campaign revealed this month.

A chief concern is Nevada, where, at 59%, she is polling below the 61% of Latinos who voted for Biden in 2020. In a recent New York Times story about Nevada Latinos and their lack of faith in government, one Latino man said that when Trump was president, things were better for him because he “had more money in the bank.”

Supporters of the Latinos for Harris-Walz campaign at a party in Los Angeles to watch Kamala Harris deliver her acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention on Aug. 22. Frederic J. Brown / AFP - Getty Images

If that’s a common sentiment, then that’s obviously not good for Harris, but if it is indeed trending up again with more trust on the economy, Nevada is most likely still in play for her.

Equis Research this week released a poll of 1,298 registered Latinos across six swing states that also has mixed results for Harris. Her Nevada numbers showed just a 54%-40% advantage over Trump, which most likely wouldn’t be enough on Election Day. As Equis points out, Harris is a “few points shy of Biden’s 2020 support levels.”

Still, not all is bleak for the Harris campaign. The Equis Research poll noted that “for the first time, Harris has a slight advantage on being ‘better for the economy’ compared to Trump 49-46 (+4). In an August survey, Trump had a +3 edge on this issue. She has also improved her margin on being a ‘strong leader’ (+6) compared to Trump—an area in which Biden, as nominee, had lagged significantly.”

It’s no wonder that Harris did a prime-time Telemundo interview with less than two weeks until Election Day

It’s no wonder that Harris did a prime-time Telemundo interview with less than two weeks until Election Day. Earlier this month, she earned kudos for showing empathy toward the Latinos and Latinas who asked her questions during the Univision town hall in Las Vegas. These latest polls would suggest that she has improved her standing with Latinos.

Nonetheless, it isn’t translating to big enough gains with Latinos.

“The concern for Harris, obviously, is that her Hispanic support is far lower than Biden’s was, both in the 2020 polls and the final election results,” NBC News and MSNBC national political correspondent Steve Kornacki wrote Tuesday. “But much of Trump’s new Hispanic support comes from younger voters who have not participated at high levels in past elections. If these voters end up sitting on the sidelines in this election, Harris could end up faring much better with Hispanics than the polling now shows.”

That’s a possible scenario, but we won’t know how that turns out until after the election. For now, Harris is doing everything she can to meet Latinos where they are.

“My agenda around an opportunity economy will benefit all Americans,” she argued, “but I am also aware of the specific impact on the Latino community.” Her goal is to make sure that Latinos are aware, too.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WASHINGTON (AP) — Russia has helped amplify and spread false and misleading internet claims about recent hurricanes in the United States and the federal government’s response, part of a wider effort by the Kremlin to manipulate America’s political discourse before the presidential election, new research shows.

The content, spread by Russian state media and networks of social media accounts and websites, criticizes the federal response to Hurricanes Helene and Milton, exploiting legitimate concerns about the recovery effort in an attempt to paint American leaders as incompetent and corrupt, according to research from the Institute for Strategic Dialogue. The London-based organization tracks disinformation and online extremism.

Advertisement

In some cases, the claims about the storms include fake images created using artificial intelligence, such as a photo depicting scenes of devastating flooding at Disney World that never happened, researchers say.

The approach is consistent with the Kremlin’s long-standing practice of identifying legitimate debates and contentious issues in the U.S. and then exploiting them. Previous disinformation campaigns have harnessed debates about immigration, racism, crime and the economy in an effort to portray the U.S. as corrupt, violent and unjust.

U.S. intelligence officials and private tech companies say Russian activity has increased sharply before the Nov. 5 election as Moscow tries to capitalize on an opportunity to undermine its chief global adversary.

Advertisement

“These are not situations that foreign actors are creating,” said Melanie Smith, director of research at ISD. “They’re simply pouring gasoline on fires that already exist.”

The content identified by ISD included English-language posts obviously meant for Americans, as well as Russian-language propaganda intended for domestic audiences. Much of the disinformation took aim at the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Democratic administration of President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris. She is her party’s nominee in the White House race against former President Donald Trump.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine remains the Kremlin’s prime motivation for spreading lies about the hurricane response. If Russia can persuade enough Americans to oppose U.S. support for Ukraine, that could ease the way for a Moscow victory, officials and analysts have said.

U.S. intelligence officials have said Russia’s disinformation seems designed to support Trump, who has praised Russian President Vladimir Putin and disparaged the NATO alliance and Ukraine’s leaders. Posts linked to Russia routinely denigrate Harris, saying she is ignoring the pleas of storm victims. By contrast, a recent post from Russian state media company RT called Trump “a mystical figure of historic proportions.”

Intelligence officials confirmed Tuesday that Russia created a manipulated video to smear Harris’ running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz.

Advertisement

People gather at a FEMA Disaster Recovery Center at A.C. Reynolds High School in Asheville, N.C.,, Tuesday, Oct. 15, 2024. (AP Photo/Makiya Seminera) via Associated Press

Russia has rejected claims that it trying to meddle in the U.S. election. The Russian Embassy hasn’t responded to messages this week seeking comment about recent allegations by researchers and intelligence officials.

Researchers at ISD found that Russian disinformation agents exploited weak content moderation on U.S.-owned social media platforms such as X to spread their content far and wide. Before it was purchased and renamed by Elon Musk, the platform once known as Twitter required labels on content from authoritarian state media. Musk rescinded that rule and gutted the platform’s content moderation efforts, leading to a surge in foreign propaganda, hate speech and extremist recruitment.

Often the false or misleading claims come from fake accounts or websites that mimic Americans or legitimate news outlets, making it difficult to determine their true origin. Unsuspecting Americans then repost and spread the content.

In July, American intelligence officials warned that “unwitting Americans” were helping do Russia’s work for it.

Advertisement

Vast armies of fake or automated accounts help spread the material further.

Researchers at the Israeli tech firm Cyabra analyzed popular posts on X that criticized FEMA for its storm response. A significant number could not be verified as belonging to a real person; one-quarter of all the responses to popular posts were deemed fake. The posts were seen by users over half a billion times.

In response, a spokesperson for X pointed to the platform’s system that allows users to add context to posts with false claims. The company did not respond to questions about its labeling policy.

“The false claims, ranging from FEMA diverting funds to aid migrants to conspiracy theories about weather manipulation, undermine public trust in government as we near election day, which could seriously impact voter confidence,” Cyabra researchers said in a report.

Politicians also have helped spread Russia’s talking points.

Rep. Paul Gosar, R-Ariz., gave an interview to the Russian state media outlet Sputnik News for a piece that played up criticism of the hurricane response. He told Sputnik that the federal response was “nonexistent,” a claim easily debunked by photos and videos of FEMA recovery workers as well as the firsthand accounts of local leaders and residents in hard-hit regions.

Gosar repeated another misleading claim that “billions of FEMA disaster funds” had been given instead to immigrants without legal status. In truth, money that funds U.S. border control and immigration programs comes from a different source than disaster funds.

Advertisement
CNN —

Donald Trump’s former national security adviser Michael Flynn has spent much of the last three years claiming the 2020 election was stolen, turning baseless conspiracy theories into a cottage industry centered around live events, a documentary and political fundraising through dark money groups.

But under oath in a court deposition earlier this year, Flynn for the first time on record acknowledged there was no evidence to support a key part of some election fraud claims — that an executive at Dominion Voting Systems helped rig the 2020 election through the company’s voting machines.

Flynn was deposed in a yearslong defamation lawsuit that former Dominion executive Eric Coomer brought against ReAwaken America, the speaking tour Flynn co-founded in 2021 that travels the country promoting election denialism and other right-wing conspiracy theories.

“Have you seen any evidence that you would consider credible, Mr. Flynn, that Eric Coomer played a role in rigging the 2020 presidential election?” Attorneys for Coomer asked Flynn at one point in the April deposition.

“I have not, no,” Flynn responded. “I don’t really know.” When pressed about the more general claims about Dominion-related election fraud, Flynn added that he’s “seen a lot of evidence” and “read a lot of reports,” but could not say for certain that he believed that evidence to be credible: “Credibility is in the eye of the legal system to determine.”

A month later, Flynn was back on TV, telling Chris Cuomo on NewsNation that the 2020 election was “filled with fraud” and that there is “clear evidence” to back it up. Pressed for details, Flynn declined to elaborate.

Video Ad Feedback Watch: Trump Adviser has no proof of election fraud; but still fundraises off it 03:40 - Source: CNN

Last month, Flynn was on Alex Jones’ InfoWars talking about a Marxist plot to steal the election from Trump. At a recent Christian nationalist festival in Pennsylvania held by Rod of Iron Ministries, Flynn spoke about unleashing vengeance if Trump wins.

“There’s a way to get after this, but we have to win first,” said Flynn. “These people are already up to no good, so we gotta win first. We win, and then Katy, bar the door. Believe me, the gates of hell, my hell will be unleashed.”

Flynn – a retired Army lieutenant general who once led the Defense Intelligence Agency, and someone Trump has indicated he would include in a second administration – has been one of the biggest promoters of the same baseless voter fraud allegations that have spawned criminal investigations, a congressional inquiry and, in the case of Dominion, a $787 million defamation settlement from Fox News.

Yet Flynn has so far skirted any legal jeopardy himself, maintaining a unique place within the MAGA movement thanks to his relentless promotion of baseless election lies, and his continued loyalty to Trump.

‘Profiting off of conspiracy theories’

As millions of voters begin making their choice for president, the lies of the last election still permeate the airwaves. The fallout is real for what used to be mundane portions of America’s elections system. There has been an exodus of election workers who have quit or retired instead of putting up with the abuse for another cycle. Elections offices are buying wearable panic buttons for workers worried about violence who want a way to quickly alert the police.

Trump and his allies have gone from claiming the 2020 election was rigged to casting doubt on the integrity of this one. At its heart is an informal confederation of Trump allies who have spent the past four years spreading the lie of voter fraud. Not only have they managed to convince large swaths of the country that the 2020 election was stolen from Trump, they’ve made a business out of it.

No one has cashed in quite like Flynn. Along with the ReAwaken America Tour, Flynn also co-founded The America Project, a nonprofit group which has raised at least $21 million from unknown donors since 2021, according to tax filings, while peddling baseless claims about the 2020 election.

Michael Flynn speaking at a ReAwaken America Tour event in Manheim, Pennsylvania on October 21, 2022. Mark Peterson/Redux

Some of that money has helped bankroll dubious attempts to undermine public faith in the security of voting systems, pay a salary to Flynn’s brother Joseph, boost the political campaigns of known election deniers, and underwrite various legal efforts to overturn the legitimate 2020 election results.

“What Mike Flynn has done is that he’s turned his once respected military career into dangerous grift, profiting off of conspiracy theories, undermining the very democracy that he once swore to protect,” said Olivia Troye, a former national security official who worked under then-Vice President Mike Pence. Troye has known Flynn for years, dating back to his time as a high-ranking military official serving in Afghanistan.

“The concern about people like Mike Flynn is that he was once a very well-respected military officer,” Troye, who is supporting Vice President Kamala Harris in the 2024 election, told CNN. “The issue is that he, someone like that, is fully capable of radicalizing others in the military, and others, like our former military, because he brings that stature.”

Coomer’s series of civil defamation lawsuits, aimed at some of the organizations and people that have propagated the claim that Dominion rigged the election, have put into the public record new details about how Flynn used his position in Trump’s inner circle and his contacts in the national security community to try to weaponize the federal government against Dominion — and convince millions of voters that the fraud was real.

Chief among them is a November 2020 email chain that Flynn forwarded to a member of Trump’s National Security Council. The email, which Flynn did not write, singles out Coomer, who was then Dominion’s director of product strategy and security, and calls for his immediate arrest.

“Eric Coomer may hold the key to the entire election theft by Dominion. Eric Coomer should be arrested immediately,” read the email that Flynn forwarded to Joshua Steinman, a former military officer and Trump’s top White House adviser on cyber policy.

The email, which has not been previously reported, was cited in court filings as evidence of how Flynn was among the earliest promoters of 2020 vote-rigging lies, and directly connects Flynn to efforts to use those false theories to convince federal officials that the election should be overturned.

Flynn passed along the email at the behest of Sidney Powell, the Trump lawyer who, along with Rudy Giuliani, brought dozens of fruitless lawsuits alleging voter fraud after the election.

“Get to Josh asap,” Powell wrote to Flynn on November 14, 11 days after the 2020 election, sharing an email she received from another right-wing election denier about Coomer’s alleged role in a conspiracy to rig the election for Joe Biden.

It’s unclear how Steinman responded to Flynn’s email. Steinman declined to comment for this story.

Coomer is also suing the Trump campaign, “My Pillow Guy” CEO Michael Lindell, and ex-Overstock.com CEO Patrick Byrne.

As criminal prosecutions into the effort to overturn the 2020 election have stalled out, Coomer’s civil suit may be what goes before a jury first. His defamation case against Lindell is scheduled for a June 2025 trial.

Coomer is not suing Flynn directly. But he is suing the ReAwaken America Tour and The America Project as part of separate defamation lawsuits. Though Flynn was integral to founding both, he has sought to distance himself from their day-to-day operations.

Troye likened Flynn’s fundraising apparatus to an “offshore shell game” that makes it difficult to determine where the funding is coming from and what that money is used for.

“Where is the funding for these entities coming from because as they kind of mask their involvement, and they’re grifting off of it, my question is, who’s the source of the funding for a lot of these entities?” she said.

A lawyer for The America Project declined to provide more context around the non-profit’s spending, while calling the defamation lawsuit against it “vexatious.”

“Put simply, Mr. Coomer’s lawsuit is nothing more than a thinly veiled attempt to utilize the court system to threaten and intimidate TAP and other organizations like it from exercising their First Amendment protected rights,” the lawyer, Christopher Demspey, told CNN in an email.

CNN asked Flynn how he aligns his statements under oath with the other statements he’s made about fraud in the 2020 election. His team didn’t answer those questions. Instead, Flynn’s attorney provided a statement that focused on the merits of using paper ballots.

Efforts to keep Trump in office

Michael Flynn lasted less than a month in the Trump administration. After it came out that he lied to the FBI about conversations he had with the Russian ambassador, Flynn resigned as Trump’s National Security Advisor on February 13, 2017. By December 2017, Flynn pleaded guilty to making false statements to the FBI. Flynn later withdrew his guilty plea and the Justice Department, under then-Attorney General William Barr, dropped the charges against him.

Over the next three years, Flynn stayed in Trump’s good graces, and after the 2020 election, he found himself in the then-president’s inner circle. As Trump fought to stay in office, Flynn was involved in a number of aggressive tactics, including a proposal he helped craft to have the military and Department of Homeland Security confiscate voting machines.

In December 2020, a draft executive order began circulating among Trump’s inner circle. It name-checked Coomer and referenced a since debunked forensic report that alleged Dominion was “intentionally and purposefully designed with inherent errors to create systemic fraud and influence election results.”

The order directed the Secretary of Defense to “seize, collect, retain and analyze” voting machines around the country.

Emails reviewed by CNN show that Flynn oversaw the process to draft and edit the document. Both he and Powell were in the Oval Office on December 18, 2020, during a notoriously unhinged meeting in which Trump was presented the draft order to seize voting machines. He never ended up signing it.

US President Donald Trumps supporters gather outside the Capitol building in Washington DC, on January 6. Tayfun Coskun/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images

Asked about that meeting and the executive orders during his April deposition, Flynn invoked his Fifth Amendment right not to offer incriminating evidence against himself. When House investigators probing the January 6, 2021, US Capitol attack deposed Flynn in 2022, he pleaded the Fifth hundreds of times.

That’s what makes what Flynn said in the Coomer deposition so stunning, said Rep. Jamie Raskin, a Democrat and former member of the House committee that investigated January 6.

“He is essentially confessing that he considered all of that a useful prop for promoting an authoritarian political program and a takeover of our government,” Raskin told CNN.

Funding a sham 2020 election audit

Flynn’s efforts to cast doubt on the 2020 election results were only getting started when Trump left office. In April 2021, Flynn formed a non-profit group called The America Project along with his brother Joseph Flynn and Patrick Byrne, the wealthy former CEO of Overstock.com who has bankrolled numerous efforts aimed at finding election fraud.

Byrne produced a 2021 documentary called “The Deep Rig,” laying out sensational theories about 2020 election fraud – including the bombastic claims about Coomer. Byrne and others involved in the documentary said the money it raised would go to The America Project.

Dempsey, the lawyer for The America Project, said the “film constitutes the expression of Constitutionally protected speech regarding a matter of public concern.” He did not answer CNN’s question about revenue from the film going to the non-profit, but noted that “Dr. Coomer’s lawsuit does not allege that TAP participated in making the film, that it had any input or authority over the film’s content, that it edited the film, or that it made any statement of its own about Dr. Coomer regarding his involvement in the 2020 Presidential Election.”

Joseph Flynn was heavily involved in promoting the film and starred in it as well. In 2022, he earned a $263,077 salary from The America Project, according to tax filings. In 2021, The America Project paid $200,000 to Resilient Patriot, an LLC registered under Michael Flynn’s name, for “strategic consulting,” while a company linked to Joseph Flynn was paid nearly $159,000 for “election integrity investigations.”

Flynn and The America Project were also directly involved in helping fund the partisan “audit” of Joe Biden’s 2020 electoral victory in Arizona that was conducted by a hand-picked group of outside investigators called the Cyber Ninjas, according to tax documents and text messages obtained by CNN.

The America Project funneled $2.75 million to the Cyber Ninjas throughout 2021, according to tax filings, in an effort to prop up what was ultimately exposed to be a sham audit of Arizona’s vote tally. The audit actually found more votes for Biden than previously had been awarded to him.

Maricopa County ballots cast in the 2020 general election are examined and recounted by contractors working for Florida-based company, Cyber Ninjas at Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Phoenix, May 6, 2021. Matt York/AP

Flynn personally helped facilitate those payments and assured Cyber Ninjas CEO Doug Logan on multiple occasions he could help secure additional funding from other pro-Trump groups – even when it became clear﻿ to Logan that his findings only reaffirmed the fact that Biden had won Arizona, according to text messages between the two men, which have not been previously reported.

Flynn’s objective, the texts show, was not only to upend the 2020 presidential election but to fundamentally change the way votes are counted at the state level – a message that is consistent with what Trump’s former national security adviser has continued to promote publicly in recent weeks.

“They are going to try and change voting forever now that they got away with stealing the 3nov election,” Flynn wrote to Logan on March 6, 2021, a view he repeated throughout nearly six months of text messages to Logan and reiterated on InfoWars on September 29.

“States really have to step up against the imposition of the federal government. States have rights too. The Dem controlled states won’t. The weak republicans won’t either (Georgia comes to mind!” Flynn added, according to text messages between the two men that were obtained by CNN.

“And citizens have to stop this by telling their elected officials it is not acceptable,” Flynn wrote to Logan.

Taking the message on the road

In the weeks after Biden’s inauguration, Flynn crossed paths with Clay Clark, a former wedding DJ in Oklahoma who spun out various businesses from his work in the bridal industry, including a radio show focused on entrepreneurship.

After meeting through Flynn’s appearance at a Tulsa political event in 2021, Clark and Flynn hatched the live event program that would become the ReAwaken America Tour, a traveling conference of prominent far-right speakers who opine on causes like the evil of Covid-related government mandates, the role Christian nationalism should be playing in society and election denialism.

Of the roughly two-dozen events the ReAwaken America Tour has hosted, Flynn has spoken at the vast majority of them and is featured prominently on its promotional materials. For a time, Flynn collected a $15,000 speaker’s fee for each appearance but, according to his deposition, the tour ran into financial difficulties and those payments ended. Clark claims the tour is a money-loser for him.

Clay Clark on stage at the final stop of the ReAwaken America Tour event 17 days before the 2024 election. Carrie Schreck/Redux

As the tour was getting up and running in 2021 Flynn was also collecting thousands of dollars in speaking fees for appearances at campaign events and for conservative political organizations, according to campaign finance records.

Flynn tends to play an emcee role at ReAwaken America Tour events, usually speaking for 20 minutes or so teeing up the general themes of the conference. Flynn sometimes makes oblique references to election fraud during his own comments, speaking to an audience that has already been primed to believe the 2020 election was stolen.

“Everybody saw the 2020 election and all the shenanigans that went on,” Flynn said during a tour event in Manheim, Pennsylvania, in October 2022. “A lot of it right here, a lot of it right here in this state.”

“They like to call you election denier,” Flynn went on to say. “I don’t deny that elections occurred. I do deny that we have a fair election system in our country. We do not. You can’t tell me that we do.”

Among the regular speakers on the ReAwaken America Tour was Joe Oltmann, a far-right activist and Colorado podcaster who was a source of election rigging smears against Coomer.

In the wake of the 2020 election, Oltmann claimed on his podcast that he had infiltrated an Antifa teleconference call, during which an “Eric” supposedly bragged about rigging the election for Biden. Oltmann pointed to anti-Trump posts on Coomer’s private Facebook page in asserting that the “Eric” he claims to have heard on the call was the Dominion executive, Coomer.

The allegations were picked up across Trump-world and were repeated by Sidney Powell and Rudy Giuliani at the infamous November 19, 2020, press conference at the Republican National Committee headquarters.

Appearing on stage at ReAwaken America Tour events in 2021 and 2022, Oltmann repeated his unfounded claims about Coomer’s election rigging scheme, in remarks that often took aggressive and even violent undertones.

Oltmann, whom Coomer is also suing for defamation, has never put forward evidence that would prove his allegations. He has refused to sit for testimony or produce subpoenaed documents, and even managed to escape a courthouse mid-way through a June deposition.

A judge recently hit Oltmann with a $1,000-a-day fine – with a threat of potential incarceration. The fine is on pause while he appeals that judgment.

Under oath in the deposition, Flynn said he couldn’t recall the details of Oltmann’s allegations about Coomer and claimed he would not recognize Oltmann if he walked into his office. Coomer’s attorneys have noted that elsewhere in the deposition Flynn said that he tries to watch as many speakers as possible when he attends tour events.

Clark has claimed that the litigation has cost him between $2,000 and $3,000 a day in legal fees, while Oltmann pleaded to his podcast listeners for contributions for his legal fights.

Lawyers for Clark and his businesses declined to comment for this story.

‘Don’t just finish on Election Day’

Consequences have mounted for others who echoed Trump election lies during and after the election.

Several of them, including Flynn’s one-time attorney Powell, were charged criminally by state prosecutors probing election subversion. Powell – who sources say has had a falling out with Flynn, her former client, and appears to be keeping a lower public profile of late – entered a guilty plea in the Fulton County, Georg﻿ia, prosecution, and quietly settled this summer the defamation lawsuit Coomer brought against her.

Ex-Trump attorney Jenna Ellis pleaded guilty in the Georgia case and has apologized for her role in peddling election lies. Giuliani is subject to a $148 million defamation judgement – currently being appealed – for his smearing of two Georgia election workers and has also been disbarred in New York and DC.

Meanwhile, Flynn has navigated around much of this fallout while positioning himself as an increasingly prominent voice on purported election fraud while the 2024 election gets underway.

As the international community prepares for a possible second Trump term, multiple foreign diplomats tell CNN they see Flynn as someone who will have influence if the former president retakes the White House and have privately speculated that he could be tapped for another high-level position if that comes to pass.

During the recent event hosted by the far-right group Rod of Iron Ministries, Flynn’s son told the crowd that his father would likely join forces with Elon Musk to head a government efficiency task force.

Flynn himself, meanwhile has started to publicly suggest he would help Trump round-up political opponents should he win in 2024.

At the Rod of Iron Ministries event, an audience member asked if Flynn would be reinstated with his full rank to “sit at the head of a military tribunal to not only drain the swamp, but imprison the swamp and on a few occasions, execute the swamp” if Trump is elected.

“I definitely believe we need accountability” Flynn said. “You know, your question went into some other areas that I think a lot of, a lot of people actually think like you do. And I think that that’s, your right, and your, and our privilege. … I mean, there is a way to get after this, but we have to win first.”

During the ReAwaken America Tour’s most recent gathering, held last weekend in Selma, North Carolina, Flynn sang along to Twisted Sister’s 1980s anthem “We’re Not Gonna Take It,” and earlier that weekend made remarks to the attendees stressing that this election was only the beginning of their movement.

“Now, there’s all kinds of things that you can go out there and do. We’ve been talking about voting all day. Yes, do that,” Flynn said Friday. “But don’t just finish on Election Day. Take this idea of what this country was designed to be and take it forward in your lives for the rest of your lives. Make every single day count.”
At an event for Senate candidate Josh Hawley, Butker said , "I'm supporting the president that's going to be the most pro-life president. It's a topic that is the most crucial topic for me. I want us to be fighting for the most vulnerable, fighting for the unborn."
Ahead of the 2022 midterm elections, then-Rep. Fred Upton saw the writing on the wall. The Michigan Republican — a relative moderate by contemporary GOP standards — had earned a lot of goodwill over the course of more than three decades on Capitol Hill, but Upton had voted to impeach Donald Trump after the Jan. 6 attack, and he was out of step with his party’s right-wing shift.

And so, the longtime congressman, facing a primary race, announced his retirement. During an appearance on NBC News’ “Meet the Press,” Upton was asked about his party’s direction. The GOP, he replied, was headed into “troubled waters.”

Two years later, Upton endorsed Kamala Harris’ presidential campaign. NBC News reported:

Former Rep. Fred Upton, R-Mich., endorsed Harris for president today, saying in a statement released by the vice president’s campaign that he has ‘never voted for a Democrat for president, until now.’

“More than 30 former GOP Members of Congress have now publicly stated that they will not support the former president and will vote for VP Harris. I am proud to add my name to that list, as I have already cast my ballot for Vice President Kamala Harris to be our next president of the United States,” the Michigan Republican said in a written statement.

After emphasizing the importance of the Jan. 6 attack, Upton went on to admonish Trump’s “unhinged behavior.”

Just hours before the former GOP congressman announced his support for Harris, the Democratic vice president also picked up an endorsement from Shawn Reilly, the mayor of Waukesha, Wisconsin.

Reilly was a Republican for most of his life; he represents a city that tends to support GOP candidates; and the mayor has never before endorsed a Democrat. But Reilly told The New York Times that he believes the 2024 election cycle is unique.

“It’s very easy to not even stick your nose in this — that’s the easiest way to go about it,” the Wisconsin mayor said. “But the reason I’m doing it is because I think we’re at a crossroads. I’m very afraid of the direction our country will head in if Donald Trump becomes president. I think we’ll be heading down a road of authoritarianism and fascism.”

A day earlier, Ann Veneman, a member of George W. Bush’s cabinet and the first woman to lead the Department of Agriculture, announced that she’s also backing the Democratic vice president’s 2024 campaign.

What’s more, as regular readers know, it was just last week when former Republican Rep. Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania said he’d already cast a ballot for Harris. A few days earlier, the Democrat also picked up some endorsements from prominent Wisconsin Republicans, including former state Senate Majority Leader Dale Schultz. A few days before that, Al Cárdenas, the former chair of the Florida Republican Party, announced his support for Harris.

If you’re thinking that the list of Republicans backing the Democratic ticket is getting pretty long, it’s not your imagination. Indeed, as the Harris campaign and its allies focus heavily on reaching out to independents and disaffected GOP voters, Republicans for Harris has become a surprisingly effective force, backed by former members of Congress, governors, state lawmakers, cabinet secretaries, White House staffers and even a former Republican vice president who probably never dreamed he’d be backing a Democratic presidential candidate.

I realize that some in the GOP, such as Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, want to know “what the hell” these anti-Trump Republicans are thinking, but what Americans are witnessing is an extraordinary display of patriotism from current and former officeholders, each of whom is putting country above party.

What’s more, let’s not overlook the fact that these same Republicans are taking a risk: They know, just as we all know, that Trump believes in using the levers of power to retaliate against those on his enemies list. It’s entirely possible that folks like Upton, Reilly, Liz Cheney and others will feel the former president’s wrath if he returns to power.

But with the nation’s future on the line, they’re doing it anyway.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Beyond campuses and churches, can Charlie Kirk turn out votes for Trump?

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

Donald Trump and his campaign have put a lot of faith in Charlie Kirk and his Turning Point network of nonprofits. Over summer, the former president headlined four campaign events with the 31-year-old Kirk. They appeared together at another Turning Point event in Georgia on Wednesday with one more event planned for Thursday in Nevada. Trump's campaign has turned over much of its 2024 voter turnout efforts to several outside groups, including Turning Point Action, rather than have the campaign and the Republican National Committee spearhead the effort, as has been traditional.

"I want to thank a special person, Charlie Kirk, for his tremendous leadership, as well as everyone at Turning Point Action, for making this event possible," said Trump onstage at a Phoenix megachurch event organized by Turning Point this June.

Sponsor Message

"From now until counting day and now until voting month, I will work the hardest that I have worked these last 12 years. I will give everything I possibly can," Kirk told the same crowd hours earlier.

Kirk's Turning Point constellation of nonprofits is large and well funded, but untested when it comes to turnout operations. This summer, Turning Point Action, the group's political arm, announced it planned to raise $108 million to spur turnout to elect Trump to another term in the White House.

But as Election Day draws near, Turning Point Action told NPR it has raised only "tens of millions," not $108 million. The group had originally told news outlets it was hiring "hundreds of ballot chasers" in swing states like Michigan, Wisconsin and Arizona, though it appears to have turned over much of those operations to a separate super PAC launched by Elon Musk.

Even if the effort falls short, Kirk and his network of Turning Point-affiliated nonprofits are poised to continue building influence on the American right. They've maintained that ascent in spite of criticism from other conservatives who have long questioned Turning Point's track record of success and lament Kirk's willingness to mainstream far-right personalities and ideas. Kirk declined to be interviewed for this story.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

This summer, each of Trump's appearances with Turning Point was a tailored appeal to different slices of the MAGA coalition. These appearances included a religious Believers' Summit, a voter turnout drive, a People's Convention graced by conspiracy theorist Alex Jones and a rally featuring anti-vaccine activist and then-presidential-candidate-turned-Trump-surrogate Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

Sponsor Message

"You are all welcome in this movement," Kirk told a crowd of thousands in Glendale, Ariz., days after Kennedy endorsed Trump in August.

"I think Charlie Kirk has been very good at pivoting to things that bring him opportunity," said Matt Boedy, a professor of religious rhetoric at the University of North Georgia, who has paid close attention to Kirk since Turning Point's early days.



Kirk's turn to religion

At Turning Point Faith's Believers' Summit in late July, Kirk told the crowd that he has spent a significant part of the last four years touring the U.S., meeting pastors and their congregations.

"I realized that there is a desire for revival in this country, that there is a yearning for a different type of Christianity," said Kirk. "It is about preaching a hot gospel and bringing a nation to repentance, which will then lead to revival."

It was a significant shift in focus for Kirk. As a teenager, he founded Turning Point USA as a conservative outreach group aimed at college students. In 2016, he befriended Donald Trump Jr. and has been close with the Trump family ever since.

In that time, he has evolved from youth organizer and media personality into the head of a wider nonprofit empire with annual revenue of about $100 million. Along the way, Kirk has platformed conspiracy theorists and helped spread falsehoods about the 2020 elections, vaccines, transgender people and demographic change. In recent years, Kirk has turned much of his attention toward activating the religious right politically.

For years, to reach his young target audience, Kirk exclusively used libertarian, secular arguments. As recently as 2018, he affirmed that "we do have a separation of church and state."

But as Kirk approached his 30s, he connected with megachurch televangelists and self-declared prophets who believe the former president has been anointed by God to return to power.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

Kirk says his spiritual turn began in earnest in late 2019, when he met a California pastor and politician named Rob McCoy who would soon gain attention for keeping his church open as the state limited public gatherings during the coronavirus pandemic.

Sponsor Message

By 2020, Kirk described Trump using a very specific reference to an increasingly popular right-wing Christian concept known as the Seven Mountain Mandate, which religious scholars warn has anti-democratic aims.

"Finally we have a president that understands the seven mountains of cultural influence," said Kirk at the Conservative Political Action Conference.



What is the Seven Mountain Mandate?

The Seven Mountain Mandate refers to a religious command, popularized by charismatic Christian leaders in the 2000s, to take dominion over seven areas of cultural influence: government, education, media, family, business, arts and religion.

In a 2011 speech, charismatic Christian leader C. Peter Wagner, an influential proponent of the Seven Mountain concept, explained the goals of the movement he helped build. "Dominion has to do with control. Dominion has to do with rulership. Dominion has to do with authority and subduing," he said. "Mandate means an authoritative order or command. It doesn't mean a good idea, or suggestion. It means an authoritative order."

Wagner, who died in 2016, was heavily influenced by ideas from the 1970s about enacting Old Testament law today, including capital punishment for things like adultery, homosexuality and blasphemy.

Boedy, the University of North Georgia professor, is writing a book on the Seven Mountain Mandate and said it aims to install perpetual, privileged Christian leadership over government and major industries across the country and world.

"I have nothing against Christians involving themselves in civic action. I am a Christian and I involve myself in civic action," said Boedy, but he argues the goal of the Seven Mountain concept goes far beyond democratic civil action. "It is not just promoting their own thing and hoping to persuade people to go along with them."

What Seven Mountain proponents want varies, but in practice it often includes banning abortion and rolling back public acceptance and protections of LGBTQ+ people. Boedy said the Seven Mountain idea has fueled school board takeovers, book bans in libraries and political campaigns up and down the ballot for years.

Sponsor Message

Asked what Kirk meant by referring to "the seven mountains" in his prime-time speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference, Turning Point spokesperson Andrew Kolvet told NPR: "I couldn't tell you what it means to different people," without clarifying what Kirk's definition is. "What I think it means to some people is that there's different areas in which culture gets influenced. And, you know, Christians have every right to engage politically."

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

Kirk, with the help of McCoy, the California pastor, launched Turning Point Faith in 2021 and found a deep new well of Christian money, media and influence, according to Boedy.

Turning Point Faith offers sermon templates, training and high-profile platforms to pastors willing to be more outspoken politically.

"The pastors that I know that have taken the boldest stance over the last two years have actually seen their attendance grow. They need bigger buildings, and their tithes and offerings have increased," Kirk told church leaders at his 2022 Pastors Summit.

NPR has not been able to independently confirm Kirk's claim, which he repeats often. Turning Point Faith claims affiliations with 2,500 congregations and counting.



"They're coming to get us"

Caleb Campbell is one of a number of evangelical leaders worried about the influence of Christian nationalism. He lives in Phoenix, where Turning Point USA is headquartered.

In 2021, his own congregants started handing him flyers for a rally at a nearby megachurch.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

"And they said, 'Pastor Caleb, you've got to come. There's a revival happening.' And revival in my religious tradition is, you know, usually talking about a spiritual renewal movement, worship. Things like that," said Campbell.

It turned out to be a monthly event hosted by Kirk. When Campbell went, he said it did feel like a church, complete with prayers, worship music and an offering bucket.

Kirk took the stage, Campbell said, "and then proceeded to do basically a sermon for about 50 minutes, quoting Scripture and then directly tying it to some of his preferred political positions."

Sponsor Message

There have always been politically outspoken churches, Campbell said, but in the last few years he has watched many pastors turn up the volume on demonizing Democrats and the left, as he said Turning Point encourages. Hundreds of his own congregants have left his church, which he works hard to keep nonpartisan, although his personal politics lean conservative.

"I was referred to as having 'a Luciferian spirit of fear,'" said Campbell. "I remember feeling like, 'What have I been doing all this time if the people that I'm pastoring are buying into this?'"

Campbell thinks Kirk's messages resonate for some Christians by focusing on taking power as the solution to anxiety about changes in culture.

"'They're coming to get us. The big scary enemy is going to make it so that you can't practice your faith in public. They want to destroy the churches. Anthony Fauci wants to shut down God,'" said Campbell, describing the tenor of Christian nationalist messaging like Turning Point's.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

At Kirk's 2023 Turning Point Pastors Summit, Kirk told the audience of pastors to put aside differences and unite around Trump. "If we don't get this right, though, and if we continue theological disputes and don't focus on liberty, then we're going to be having those theological disputes from prison," said Kirk, reprising a sentiment he has evoked many times before.

Campbell said he has spent time with Christians who face jail and persecution around the world.

"When I hear Americans using that language, I think it's dishonoring and dishonest," he said. "I mean, I wear a cross around my neck in public. And most of the time people are like, 'Hey, cool cross.'"

There is an increasing belief among some evangelical communities that religious persecution is imminent should Democrats succeed politically, "especially among charismatic believers and those who have kind of an apocalyptic mindset," according to Denison University political science professor Paul Djupe, who has done extensive surveys on religious engagement in politics.

Sponsor Message

Evangelicals, he said, have also been voting at higher rates over time, even as the proportion of evangelicals in the U.S. has been shrinking.

"So put those together, and that's an incredible batch of tinder that can be ignited to participate in politics, both within elections and then outside of elections in other ways, like showing up to rallies, for instance, donating to candidates, getting a volunteer network to work for candidates," said Djupe.



A growing role in Republican politics

As Turning Point Faith has grown Kirk's network of church partners, another of his nonprofits, Turning Point Action, is marshaling many of those same supporters to turn out votes for Trump this fall.

Voter turnout operations are typically run by national and state Republican parties or candidates' own campaigns. But this year, a Federal Election Commission decision allowed campaigns to coordinate canvassing with outside groups.

For Turning Point, that has meant hiring staffers, developing a canvassing app and staffing tables at both on- and off-campus events. Kolvet, the Turning Point spokesperson, told NPR, "Suffice to say that it is a massive, massive impact when you start combining all of those tabling events, all of those rallies, all of those football games, all those gun shows."

But some who've seen Turning Point's work up close over the years are cautious of taking the group's word about its successes. Among them is Kim Owens, a Republican political consultant in Arizona.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

"They started out with that phrase 'big government sucks,'" said Owens, "and that was true and it still is. But they've lost sight of that because now it's about 'big Turning Point is better.'"

The group has become an outsize presence in her state, but not by reaching young voters. Instead, she said, Turning Point's work in recent years has helped force out many longtime Republican Party officers by throwing its resources and support behind candidates that it views as most loyal to Trump. Tyler Montague calls it "rooting out heretics." He was state committeeman for the Arizona Republican Party for 10 years.

Sponsor Message

"This isn't youth outreach anymore. This is them seizing power. And they're doing it by energizing and activating this strain of populism in the Republican Party," said Montague, who has filed complaints that were later dismissed against Turning Point for alleged campaign finance violations.

Turning Point's true strengths, he said, are its media presence, slick branding and huge, flashy events. These are "shiny objects" for its donors, Montague said, adding that as Turning Point's influence has grown, Arizona Republicans have gotten weaker. In recent years, the party there has lost both U.S. Senate seats, the governor's office and the presidential election.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

"They're not winners," Montague said. "They're able to capture this crowd and even fill a cheering room, but not quite get electoral majorities."



Conspiracy theories, legal troubles

Other conservatives have also sounded warnings about Turning Point over the years. In 2018, a memo that leaked from another campus conservative group, Young America's Foundation, included a laundry list of reasons to stay away from Turning Point.

The group's history, the memo says, includes things like fabricating its successes on campuses, hiring "Racists & Nazi Sympathizers" and embarrassing the conservative movement by encouraging students to wear diapers on campus to poke fun at the concept of safe spaces.

Kirk's focus, the memo says, "has always been on building his own brand, not strengthening the Conservative Movement."

In the years after those critiques were leaked to the public, Turning Point's revenues and influence skyrocketed. As NPR reported this story, Turning Point persuaded Young America's Foundation to issue a statement of support.

Young America's Foundation did not refute any of the specific claims in its original memo. But in a statement, its current president, former Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, told NPR that its competition today is "radicals on campus, in schools and on social media." He added: "We are happy to see Turning Point prosper, as we need more groups in the conservative movement working with students to grow."

Sponsor Message

Turning Point also quickly collected glowing statements supportive of its record from Donald Trump Jr., former Republican presidential candidate Vivek Ramaswamy and three Republican congressmen.

Kolvet, the group's spokesperson, brushed off voices critical of the group. "My response to them is, you know, it's really easy to criticize people that have built something. It's very, very hard to build something. It's very, very hard to build something that has real impact," said Kolvet.

The group's troubles extend beyond just disapproval, however. Some members of Turning Point's staff have also faced legal problems.

Last year, two Turning Point employees admitted to assaulting a queer Arizona State University instructor. One of the employees still works at Turning Point.

This spring, a longtime Turning Point executive was one of 11 Arizonans indicted for involvement in a plot to offer fake Electoral College electors in 2020. He has pleaded not guilty. A state lawmaker running Turning Point's Chase the Vote efforts was accused of personally forging 100 petition signatures to get on the ballot. The lawmaker called a lawsuit filed against him "ludicrous" as he dropped out of his race, after which the lawsuit and an official ethics complaint were also dropped.

Recent guests on Kirk's top-10 podcast include a slavery apologist, a pastor who believes women should not have the right to vote and Steve Sailer, a longtime promoter of racist pseudoscience.

toggle caption Caitlin O'Hara for NPR

Turning Point's spokesman told NPR that Kirk condemns white supremacy and doesn't always agree with his guests. He also disputed the characterization of Sailer as a white supremacist.

"Pardon us if we have a healthy skepticism of what the approved-of, regime, institutional mainstream label of racism is, because we've seen it be abused time and time again," said Kolvet.

For Montague, the former Republican committeeman in Arizona, it's all evidence that the group's approach isn't helping the Republican cause. He had advice for conservatives in other states where Kirk says he wants to expand the model that Turning Point has built up in Arizona.

Sponsor Message

"The same advice I'd give to people who're thinking about starting smoking. Don't do it. It's bad for you," he said. "This looks cool. Sounds fun. All these people are doing it. It's not good for you."
LOADING ERROR LOADING

With just days until Election Day, former President Donald Trump and the Republican Party’s closing message is that any Democratic win will be the result of cheating — and new polling shows their voters believe them.

In recent months, Trump and the GOP have promoted “Swamp the Vote,” a website that calls for Trump supporters to do their part to “guarantee we win by more than the Margin of Fraud” by voting early. The site is paid for by the Republican National Committee.

Advertisement

“We need ALL HANDS ON DECK to defeat Kamala Harris and the far left liberals big money fraud machine,” it declares. “We must SWAMP THEM WITH VOTES to guarantee our victory is TOO BIG TO RIG.”

A video embedded in the website features Trump saying, “Keep your eyes open, because these people want to cheat, and they do cheat, and frankly, it’s the only thing they do well.”

“The way you win is to swamp them,” Trump adds in the video. “If we swamp them, they can’t cheat. It just doesn’t work out.”

Only 57% of Trump supporters said they believe this November’s elections will be run and administered somewhat or very well, according to polling of registered voters that the Pew Research Center released Thursday — compared to 90% of Harris supporters. Forty-two percent of Trump supporters believed the elections would be run “not too well” or “not at all well.”

Advertisement

Both groups had high confidence in election administrators in 2018, Pew’s historical data shows, but a dramatic split between the Democratic and Republican candidate supporters developed in 2020 and has only grown wider since.

There was a similar split in confidence that mail-in and absentee ballots will be counted as voters intended, with 85% of Harris supporters confident the counts will be accurate compared to 38% of Trump supporters.

Voters were also split, though less dramatically, on how confident they were that in-person votes will be counted accurately, that state election officials and local poll workers will do a good job and that U.S. election systems are secure against cyberattacks.

Trump supporters were also far less confident than Harris supporters that there would be a clear winner of the election after all votes are counted — just 58% believed that would be the case, compared to 85% of Harris supporters.

Notably, Trump supporters were more likely to say that the Supreme Court would be “politically neutral” in decisions regarding legal challenges to the presidential election, with 34% extremely or very confident, versus just 6% for Harris supporters. The court currently leans conservative, with six justices appointed by Republican presidents — including three Trump appointees — and three justices appointed by Democrats.

Advertisement

The Pew poll reflected a survey of 4,025 registered voters from Sept. 30 to Oct. 6, 2024, either online or by phone, and weighted to represent population demographics, partisan affiliation, education and other factors. Respondents were members of Pew’s American Trends Panel, described as “a group of people recruited through national, random sampling of residential addresses who have agreed to take surveys regularly.”

Trump has never unconditionally said he would accept the election results.

In June, during his CNN debate with President Joe Biden, he refused to say outright that he’d accept the results of the election after all legal challenges are exhausted. Instead, after several prods from moderator Dana Bash, Trump said, “If it’s a fair and legal and good election, absolutely,” before regurgitating his lies about the 2020 election: “I would have much rather accepted these, but the fraud and everything else was ridiculous.”

Last month, asked if he would certify the election should Harris win, House Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) replied, “Well of course — if we have a free, fair and safe election, we’re going to follow the Constitution. Absolutely.”

In August, he said at a North Carolina rally that “we have all the votes we’ll need” but that Democrats “are going to cheat like hell to win the election because they have no bounds.”

Advertisement

Last month, he said that if “there was no cheating — if God came down from on high and said ‘I’m going to be your vote tabulator for this election,’ I would leave this podium right now.” He separately told the Fraternal Order of Police, “Watch for the voter fraud, because we win without voter fraud, we win so easily.”

“We have to have a landslide because they cheat so damn much,” he added.

On Truth Social, he baselessly accused Democrats of using military and overseas ballots to cheat — rhetoric that the Republican Party has backed up with lawsuits targeting those voters.

Perhaps the one exception to Trump’s rhetoric about stolen elections came Monday, when he was asked if he’d seen any “incidents of cheating that lead you to believe that this election will not be fair.” Trump replied by saying, “I haven’t.”

But he wasn’t done.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Reports that GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump praised Adolf Hitler and said he wished his military leaders were more like the German dictator’s generals have left Republican candidates and elected officials publicly playing defense in the waning days before the Nov. 5 general election.

Some Republicans opted to dispute the account by John Kelly, Trump’s former White House chief of staff. Others took a throwing-hands-in-the-air approach, saying that ultimately voters know Trump says outrageous things.

Advertisement

The former president took to his own social media site to dispute Kelly’s account Wednesday afternoon, as well as in an interview Thursday with conservative talk radio personality Hugh Hewitt.

“Even though I shouldn’t be wasting my time with him, I always feel it’s necessary to hit back in pursuit of THE TRUTH. John Kelly is a LOWLIFE, and a bad General, whose advice in the White House I no longer sought, and told him to MOVE ON!” Trump posted on Truth Social.

In the post, he also said that Kelly had “made up a story out of pure Trump Derangement Syndrome Hatred.”

In his interview with Hewitt, Trump said past attacks on him had backfired and his candidacies had overhauled the GOP party.

Advertisement

“The Republican Party is a very big, powerful party. Before, it was an elitist party with real stiffs running it,” he said.

Kelly, a former Marine general who was Trump’s longest-serving chief of staff, spoke with both The Atlantic and The New York Times about his concerns with Trump’s strongman leanings.

Kelly confirmed previous reporting that Trump had said Hitler “did some good things, too” as well as that he wished his own military leaders had been like Hitler’s generals, who Trump mistakenly believed were loyal (even as history recorded that some had participated in assassination attempts against Hitler).

The former chief of staff also told the Times that Trump “certainly falls into the general definition of fascist.”

Vice President Kamala Harris pounced on Kelly’s comments Wednesday, addressing them with reporters and during a CNN town hall later that day, where she agreed that Trump is a fascist and described Kelly’s statements, coming so close to the election, as “a 911 call to the American people.”

Advertisement

Harris was not the only Democrat playing up Kelly’s remarks and using them to put their GOP opponents on the spot.

“As American citizens and voters who believe in the Constitution, these reports are a stark reminder of the stakes of this election, that Donald Trump is wholly unfit to be Commander in Chief, and belongs nowhere near the Oval Office ever again,” said Rep. Mikie Sherrill (D-N.J.) in a statement.

“Not only do these offensive comments discount and downplay the horrors of the Holocaust and Hitler’s evil mass murder of millions of Jews, they further prove why Donald Trump is unfit to serve as our nation’s commander-in-chief,” Sen. Jacky Rosen (D-Nev.), who is in a tough reelection race, said in a statement.

“I’ve called out antisemitism and Holocaust distortion when they rear their ugly head regardless of which side of the aisle it comes from, and I hope my opponent can put partisanship aside to join me in denouncing these disturbing comments,” Rosen added.

Similarly, John Avlon, the Democratic challenger to Rep. Nick LaLota (R-N.Y.), raised the remarks in a televised debate Wednesday night, citing LaLota’s support of Trump.

Advertisement

“That seems pretty relevant to the choices facing our nation and to the judgment my opponent observes,” Avlon said.

LaLota accepted Trump’s claim that Kelly was incorrect.

“A good journalist, an independent, honest, trustworthy journalist, would verify the fact before he spewed some sort of rhetoric hearsay that has not been confirmed,” LaLota said during the debate, referring to Avlon’s past as a cable TV commentator. “The campaign has denied that, as it should. That should not be said anywhere.”

A similar tack was taken by Sen. Bill Hagerty (R-Tenn.) in an appearance on CNN’s “News Central,” saying he doubted the veracity of Kelly’s claims.

“Obviously, he doesn’t like President Trump. I would take that with a grain of salt just as I would some of the other things that have been reported that have been debunked consistently along these lines,” said Hagerty, who is not up for reelection this year.

Another Republican, New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu, also said on CNN that supporters would look past Kelly’s accusation and still vote for Trump.

Advertisement

“People are willing to say, look, I don’t like his style, I don’t like his approach, I don’t like the things he says, but if we can get a Republican mindset out of Washington that says, you come first as an individual, not big government. States rights matter, regulatory reforms, we’re going to cut regulation out. We’re going to make things a little easier in terms of costs. We’re going to handle the inflation,” Sununu said.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

One of Donald Trump’s best-known promises ― and quite possibly one of his most important, politically ― is his vow to preserve two of America’s most beloved government programs.

“I am going to protect Social Security and Medicare,” Trump said in his July speech at the Republican National Convention, repeating a line he’d said many times before and would say many times afterwards.

Advertisement

But Trump didn’t mention another vital program: Medicaid, which pays medical bills for roughly 1 in 5 Americans. This omission does not appear to be accidental.

When HuffPost asked the Trump campaign last month whether the Republican nominee would extend his no-cuts pledge to Medicaid, the campaign offered a vague, bland response.

“As President Trump said, he will release more details but his overall position on healthcare remains the same: bring down costs and increase the quality of care by improving competition in the marketplace,” national press secretary Karoline Leavitt said in a statement emailed to HuffPost.

That non-denial denial is just one of several reasons to think Trump and Republicans might in fact target Medicaid if they get the chance. And while it’s an open question whether they would be able to get major cuts all the way through Congress, the consequences would be substantial, for the federal budget and for the many millions of Americans who depend on the program.

Advertisement

It would be the type of policy stance that might matter to voters in a presidential election — at least, if they knew about it.

Why Medicaid Matters — To Both Parties

Medicaid had nearly 73 million enrollees as of June, a number that includes low-income children and working-age Americans, for whom the program covers nearly all medical bills. It also includes several million low-income seniors and people with disabilities who use Medicaid to pay for nursing homes, prescription drug copayments and other expenses that their Medicare policies do not.

Democrats and other champions of the program generally consider Medicaid a success ― not because they think it’s perfect, but because of the financial security, access to medicine and improvements in health it provides to a large group of economically vulnerable Americans. Among other things, the program’s defenders note, a dramatic expansion of Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act is the primary reason America’s uninsured rate has reached record lows.

Republicans have a very different view of Medicaid. They see a bloated, inefficient program that they say yields few benefits and disincentivizes low-income people from working — all at a massive, economy-distorting cost to the taxpayer. Medicaid is now one of the biggest single line items in the federal budget, with annual expenditures that exceed $500 billion. That doesn’t even include the more than $200 billion contributed by states, which manage the program.

Cutting and transforming Medicaid into a more narrowly targeted program with limited federal funding has been a Republican Party priority since the days when Rep. Newt Gingrich of Georgia, seen here in 1995, became speaker during Bill Clinton's presidency. JOSHUA ROBERTS via Getty Images

Advertisement

And so while Democrats have spent decades pushing to expand Medicaid, as part of their long-term project to get to universal health insurance, Republicans have spent decades trying to limit, cut or replace the program, as part of their long-term project to downsize the federal government and reduce direct income transfers from the wealthy to the poor.

Republicans in Congress pushed hard for Medicaid cuts throughout the 1990s and then again in the 2010s. Former House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) once famously said he’d been “dreaming” of capping Medicaid funding since he was “drinking out of kegs” in college.

The specifics of the various Republican proposals have varied, but the underlying concept has been consistent: Change Medicaid from an open-ended entitlement that expands to meet the demand for it, no matter how many people qualify, into a program with some kind of predetermined spending formula that would likely not keep up with rising health care costs, increases in financial need or both.

Such a transformation would leave more responsibility for funding Medicaid to states ― which, under those past GOP plans, would also get more leeway to cap enrollment, limit services or otherwise scale back their coverage.

What Trump Might Do

The closest Republicans came to making these sorts of changes to Medicaid was probably 2017, when they tucked such a proposal into legislation that would have repealed the Affordable Care Act. That bill would have reduced Medicaid spending by more than $800 billion over a decade and reduced enrollment by 14 million, according to Congressional Budget Office projections at the time.

Advertisement

Trump pushed Congress to pass the bill, which died when it couldn’t get through the Senate; he included large Medicaid cuts in budget proposals he submitted later in his term. And while Trump has been silent on the topic in this campaign, some of his top allies and advisers have called for Medicaid cuts in their proposed blueprints for a second Trump presidency.

This year’s official House Republican budget resolution, the most recently proposed budget from the House Republican Study Committee (which represents conservative Republicans) and the Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025 all contain some version of a proposal to reduce or limit Medicaid spending significantly.

“There isn’t a lot of detail,” Edwin Park, a Georgetown University research professor who has been documenting Republicans’ Medicaid plans in a series of blog posts, told HuffPost. “But they all have the same theme, which is a big cost shift to states and then new flexibilities, new options for states to make cuts, as a way to compensate for those cost shifts.”

“These can be dialed up or down, obviously, but they could involve hundreds of billions of dollars in Medicaid cuts, potentially trillions, over 10 years ― and then potentially many trillions in future decades,” Park went on.

Former President Donald Trump and former House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) gather with House Republicans at the White House in May 2017 to celebrate passage of legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act. That legislation, which failed to get through the Senate, would have cut Medicaid spending by more than $800 million and reduced enrollment by 14 million, according to official projections. NurPhoto via Getty Images

Advertisement

Larry Levitt, executive vice president for health policy at the research organization KFF, told HuffPost such reductions would “leave states holding the bag and facing tough choices to cut spending elsewhere, limit Medicaid eligibility, reduce services, or cut payments to doctors and hospitals.”

“Much of Medicaid spending is for seniors getting long-term care and people with disabilities,” Levitt added, “so those groups would be particularly vulnerable.”

Trump of course has tried to distance himself from Project 2025, even though its contributor list is littered with current and former Trump advisers. And neither the Trump campaign nor Trump himself has said he’s committed to the House Republicans’ proposals.

But there’s one big reason to think Trump and Republicans would target Medicaid if they get the opportunity: They will need the money.

The top legislative priority for Republicans during a Trump presidency would almost certainly be cutting taxes — namely, a permanent extension of the cuts passed the last time Trump was in office. Those tax cuts are set to expire in 2025.

Advertisement

Making them permanent is likely to cost several trillion dollars, according to budget projections. And for a variety of reasons ― some having to do with the rules of the arcane budget process Republicans would likely need to use to get legislation through the Senate ― a GOP-led Congress would probably try to offset the costs of those tax cuts by also cutting something else.

If Medicare, Social Security and defense funding are all off the table, Medicaid would be the obvious place to turn, given that it’s the next biggest spending item in the budget. That’s one reason why close observers of health policy believe, as Maya Goldman of Axios noted back in August, that “no program is more in the crosshairs than Medicaid.”

How The Debate Might Play Out

Whether a serious effort to cut or limit Medicaid could succeed is difficult to say.

Over the years, Medicaid has proven politically resilient. The specter of so many people losing coverage loomed large in the defeat of the Obamacare repeal push in 2017. It came up at congressional town halls and drove protests on Capitol Hill. The possible impact of Medicaid cuts also figured prominently in the defeat of House Republican budgets during their 1990s showdowns with then-President Bill Clinton.

This wasn’t what many political professionals had expected, given that programs for poor people frequently lack powerful constituencies and carry the familiar stigmas of “welfare.” But many Americans have come to know and depend on Medicaid personally.

Sometimes that’s because Medicaid finances long-term care for themselves or for relatives. Sometimes that’s because (especially following the Affordable Care Act) it provides insurance to adults in their lives who are working but don’t have coverage through their jobs.

Advertisement

Still, Medicaid survived past attempts to cut it because the public grasped the stakes. If that understanding comes too late, all bets are off.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Former President Donald Trump boasted that his supporters have “no idea” what he did in the White House before launching into a nonsensical claim involving one of America’s NATO allies at a campaign rally Wednesday in Georgia.

“I stopped wars with France,” the GOP presidential nominee said as some supporters in the crowd applauded him.

Advertisement

He continued, “France. You know the France story? They were gonna charge us, think of this, 25% to all Amer — I have to protect American companies whether we like ’em or not. Some of ’em I didn’t even like.”

The former president may have been referring to France’s 2019 plans to charge U.S. tech giants a 3% tax on revenue from digital services in its country.

Trump, at an Iowa rally earlier this year, claimed that France wanted to impose a “big” tax on American products when he was in office, so he threatened French President Emmanuel Macron with a 100% tax on “every bottle” of Champagne and wine coming into the U.S. from his country.

On Wednesday, the GOP nominee quickly shifted from his France war talk to continue his rambling.

“You know, Google is treating us much better, did you notice that? What happened to Google? They’re treating us much better. Very nice. I appreciate that very much,” Trump said.

Advertisement

He continued, “They say McDonald’s was one of the most-viewed things that they ever had. Can you believe, McDonald’s?”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Other news outlets have retreated behind paywalls. At HuffPost, we believe journalism should be free for everyone.

Would you help us provide essential information to our readers during this critical time? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
How Trump's campaign answers questions about abortion

NPR's Steve Inskeep talks to Hogan Gidley, a former press secretary for the Trump campaign, about the GOP's message in the final days of the race.

STEVE INSKEEP, HOST:

We have Hogan Gidley, who was a deputy press secretary in the Trump White House. Hogan, thanks for coming by. Good to see you.

HOGAN GIDLEY: Absolutely. Thanks for having me. I appreciate your time.

INSKEEP: And I understand you said you're going to be door-knocking a little bit later.

GIDLEY: Door-knocking this weekend, heading over to the Pittsburgh side of the state to do the bus tour with the Trump folks later today as well.

INSKEEP: Do you think that face-to-face contact is what decides an election like this?

GIDLEY: I think when you're talking about margins decided by a few thousand votes, all the hand-to-hand combat you can participate in, the better off you'll be. And looking into the eyes of voters and finding out exactly what they want out of candidates and what they want out of campaigns is always helpful when you're trying to get this stuff done.

INSKEEP: Now, through the program, we're hearing about lots of different issues - the economy, immigration, inflation. We just heard something about social issues. One of them is abortion. Now, I know former President Trump has said this is a state matter now...

GIDLEY: Right.

INSKEEP: ...Which, according to the Supreme Court, it is. But there are also numerous ways - as you know from working in the White House, numerous ways that a president does weigh in on abortion rights. How do you see the president's second term if he gets one?

GIDLEY: Yeah. I don't know he's going to weigh in much at all. I think he's been pretty consistent on this. For the first time in 50 years, we now have people deciding this issue as opposed to unelected judges. I think that's significant. When you're talking about misinformation and disinformation campaigns, I think one of the most successful one has been on the pro-abortion side - 68% of Americans actually believed when Roe v. Wade was overturned that abortion was outlawed in this country - obviously not the case. In fact, a story just came out yesterday. There have been more abortions in America since the overturning of Roe v. Wade.

INSKEEP: True.

GIDLEY: So it's obvious those rights still exist.

INSKEEP: Although, when we think about a president of the White House, it's not like it's off the table for the president. Paying for the military to travel - that's a choice that President Biden made, President Trump could make differently if he's president again - health regulations, restrictions on scientific research, which President Bush was involved in once upon a time - there's even a conservative proposal to require states to report abortion information to HHS. Abortion is part of what people are voting on, right?

GIDLEY: Oh, there's no question about it because it has been such a hot topic in this country now for half of a century. But the fact is what Donald Trump was able to accomplish was giving that decision over to the states. And, listen, we can talk about a federal law all you want to, but Trump's been very clear about that, too. He doesn't want a federal law. He would not sign a federal law - any type of ban on abortion - despite how many times the left tries to say he would. He's been very clear about it. And here's the beauty of the Trump campaign - you don't have to guess. He was already president of the United States, and you didn't see that type of movement on his side.

INSKEEP: Although he appointed the three justices who, he explicitly promised, would overturn Roe v. Wade, and they did.

GIDLEY: And they sent it right back to the people as he promised.

INSKEEP: And they did.

GIDLEY: Yep.

INSKEEP: And they did. I want to ask about another bit of news. A number of Republican members of Congress have filed a lawsuit in Pennsylvania, challenging in advance overseas ballots, including people serving in the military. Why do that now?

GIDLEY: I've not seen the details of that lawsuit, so it'd be tough for me to comment on exactly the reason why. But the question of election integrity or security of our ballots has been a long-standing one in this country for decades. I mean, while 2000 saw a very serious problem in the state of Florida, obviously, we've traded the dimpled chads and the hanging chads and dimpled ballots for drop boxes and mail-in, but there's still questions and concerns. And it's the Democratic Party, obviously, that has questioned the outcome of every presidential election since Reagan, refusing to seat electors. So Raskin himself even said - the congressman sitting currently - made the point, hey, I'm going to go ahead - if Trump wins, I'm going to go and tell you now we're going to not certify the thing.

INSKEEP: Well, let's be clear. Some Democrats have questioned the results of past elections. Jamie Raskin of Maryland himself tried to challenge the 2016...

GIDLEY: Sure.

INSKEEP: ...Election result and was shut down by the then-vice president of the United States, Joe Biden...

GIDLEY: Correct.

INSKEEP: ...Who said this is over, which was the position of the Democratic Party. President Trump raised his questions in 2020 about a stolen election. It was litigated in court. Nothing was found. There were audits afterward, even by Trump allies in places like Arizona - found nothing to overturn the election. The laws have been updated and changed in many places, tightened in ways that Republicans would want. Isn't that all an argument for broadly having faith and confidence in the election results this fall, regardless of who wins?

GIDLEY: In some places, I think it is. I mean, look, states - we take this federalist model where you get to decide because what works in Montana may not work in Massachusetts or Maine or Mississippi. And so states have the right to make those laws to protect legal votes and legal voters. You saw this in Georgia. They passed some significant voter protection laws in that state and, of course, were vilified by Kamala Harris and Joe Biden and the left for being racist and suppressing voters. But it turns out, when you actually put measures in place that instill confidence, more people turn out, as is the case in Georgia.

INSKEEP: Never mind Donald Trump - are you personally going to accept these election results?

GIDLEY: Again, it depends on how the thing's conducted on its face. I have to be confident in the fact that the votes that are cast are counted properly, of course.

INSKEEP: Hogan Gidley is a former deputy press secretary in the Trump White House. Hogan, thanks for coming by. I'm glad you got a cup of coffee.

GIDLEY: Anytime. Thanks so much.

INSKEEP: We'll talk to you again sometime.

Copyright © 2024 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by an NPR contractor. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.
With Donald Trump’s election denialism looming over the 2024 presidential race, Kamala Harris said she is prepared for her opponent to prematurely declare a victory on election night, as he did four years ago.

In an interview with NBC News on Tuesday, Harris said that she is currently focused on winning the race, but added that she is ready for Trump to potentially attempt to steal the election.

“We’ve got two weeks to go, and I’m very much grounded in the present, in terms of the task at hand,” Harris said. “And we will deal with election night and the days after as they come, and we have the resources and the expertise and the focus on that as well.”

In 2020, Trump declared victory against Joe Biden shortly after 2 a.m. ET on election night — before all the votes were counted.

In 2020, Trump declared victory against Joe Biden shortly after 2 a.m. ET on election night — before all the votes were counted, including in key battleground states. In the current race, which is expected to be razor-thin, Democrats have steeled themselves for the possibility that Trump will again try to subvert the election in the event of a narrow defeat.

The Republican presidential nominee and his allies have spent months sowing doubt about election security. Trump has repeatedly refused to commit to accepting the results and has hinted at political violence if he does not win. He also has filled the highest ranks of GOP leadership with election deniers.

Republican officials have filed a slew of lawsuits in battleground states that are ostensibly aimed at preventing widespread voter fraud (of which there is no evidence), setting the stage for the GOP to legally challenge an election loss. Meanwhile, Democrats are largely playing defense, including going up against these Republican lawsuits in court.
Anxiety about the 2024 election is high. Both sides know that their candidate might lose — and they want polls to tell them just how scared to be.

Right now, polls give us the clearest answers to those questions. But there’s a problem: Every year, polling gets tougher. We pollsters face three core challenges that threaten the accuracy of all political surveys. Nobody has solved them, and it’s not clear anyone can.

Here’s what we’re up against:

Challenge #1: Almost nobody wants to talk to pollsters — and those who do might be weirdos.

Polling is built on a simple idea: If we talk to a representative, miniature version of a state or country, we can estimate what the whole state or country thinks. It’s like getting a sample at an ice cream shop: one well-mixed spoonful tells you what a whole cone will taste like.

Nonresponse makes good data rare and expensive.

But it’s getting tougher to reach the people needed to build that mini-country or mini-state. Response rates — how often people are willing to pick up a cold call or answer a text from us — have been dropping for decades. The response rates for Pew Research Center’s telephone surveys plunged from 36% in 1997 to 6% in 2018. Nate Cohn of The New York Times reported a 0.4% response rate to his polls in 2022. And any pollster will tell you response rates are low this year as well.

Nonresponse makes good data rare and expensive. Polls are costly, in part, because we spend so much money sending out unanswered texts or making calls that get sent straight to voicemail. And as polls get more expensive, media organizations will either sponsor fewer surveys or opt for polls that reduce costs by cutting corners.

But even when a group can afford to field a poll, nonresponse creates huge potential data problems.

When only 1 out of 100 people take a poll, pollsters have to make statistical adjustments. Some — such as getting the right demographic mix — are easy. If a pollster just can’t reach enough Latino, working class, young or rural voters, they often give the underrepresented voters they did contact a little more weight in their calculations. Weighted polls give each demographic a more accurate amount of say, even though some groups were harder to contact.

Other adjustments are not so easy.

Suppose a pollster has the right demographic mix in their poll but mostly happens to interview, for lack of a better description, nerdy rule-followers. This pollster might miss cranky, anti-establishment Trump voters — and risk undercounting the Trump vote for the third election straight.

It’s almost impossible to directly adjust for this type of issue. The census helps us calculate how many 18- to 34-year-olds should be in a poll, but not how many cranks and nerds. So pollsters have to get creative with math — which leads to another issue.

Challenge #2: We have to model our way around the fact that nobody talks to us. That’s risky.

The most common response to this problem — a shortage of pro-Trump, anti-institution Republicans in the 2020 polls — is weighting by “recalled vote.” Essentially, pollsters ask people how they voted in 2020 and try to get the right number of Trump and Biden voters in their sample.

Everyone is using math to adjust for the sad fact that normal people don’t take surveys.

Though I’ve used this tactic in some polls, there are downsides. Respondents don’t always correctly recall whom they voted for. Every estimate of how many Trump or Biden voters will vote again in 2024 is just that — an estimate. The list goes on.

That being said, many reputable pollsters say that weighting by recalled vote improved the accuracy of past surveys. And pollsters that only weight by party — and not recalled vote — might fail to fully address problems that damaged the industry’s credibility four years ago.

There’s no right answer. Everyone is using math to adjust for the sad fact that normal people don’t take surveys. And every pollster is on edge because, if we make the smallest mistake, we’ll be punished for years.

Challenge #3: Elections are closer than ever, so “the polls” will almost certainly be “wrong.”

The last true blowout presidential win was Ronald Reagan’s 1984 re-election. The last 40 years have seen the most consistently competitive presidential races in living memory. That’s bad news for polls — which are blunt instruments rather than precision predictors.

When a pollster randomly samples the electorate, they can — through no fault of their own — accidentally pick up a few too many voters from one side or the other. When we try to poll an upcoming election, we’re making (fallible) projections about who will and won’t turn out. And there’s plenty more uncertainty — from nonresponse, decisions around weighting and more — that’s just not easy to communicate to the lay reader.

In a race this tight, in which survey after survey has Harris and Trump dead even in the swing states, a good pollster could do everything right, yet still miss the result by a point or two and face years of ridicule from a huge audience of readers.

But we pollsters can’t look at these problems, yell “it’s not fair!” and go home. I’ve built election forecast models, and I’ve seen firsthand that polls are the best tool for predicting elections. More importantly, they’re the only way to ask members of the public what they think on any question, in real time.

The problems with polling are real. Maybe at some point, nonresponse or some other issue will become unsolvable and cause a catastrophic, industrywide collapse. But unless that happens, we’ll need to keep polling, because nothing else quite does what polls do.
This story was originally published by Grist and is republished here as part of the Climate Desk collaboration.

Helene and Milton, the two massive hurricanes that just swept into the country — killing hundreds of people, and leaving both devastation and rumblings of political upheaval in seven states — amounted to their own October surprise. Not that the storms led to some irredeemable gaffe or unveiled some salacious scandal. The surprise, really, may be that not even the hurricanes have pushed concerns about climate change more toward the center of the presidential campaign.

As early voting gets underway in some states and with less than two weeks before Election Day, voters will decide between Vice President Kamala Harris, who has called climate change an “existential threat,” and former President Donald Trump, who has called climate change a “hoax.” The editorial staff of Grist, one of Vox’s partners in the Climate Desk collaboration, has put together a climate-focused voter’s guide — a package of analyses and predictions about what the next four years may bring from the White House, depending on who wins.

The next administration will be decisive for the country’s progress on critical climate goals. By 2030, the US has committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent to 52 percent below 2005 levels, and expects to supply up to 13 million electric vehicles annually. A little further down the line, though no less critical, the country’s climate goals include reaching 100 percent carbon-free electricity by 2035 and achieving a net-zero emissions economy by 2050.

As you gear up to vote, here are 15 ways that Harris’s and Trump’s climate- and environment-related policies could affect your life — along with some information to help inform your vote. —Paige Vega, Vox climate editor, and Grist staff

Courtesy Robert Nickelsberg/Getty Images via Grist



Your energy mix

Over the last year or so, utility companies across the country have woken up to a new reality: After two decades of flat growth, electricity demand is about to spike, due to the combined pressures of new data centers, cryptocurrency mining, a manufacturing boom, and the electrification of buildings and transportation.

While the next president will not directly decide how the states supply power to their new and varied customers, he or she will oversee the massive system of incentives, subsidies, and loans by which the federal government influences how much utilities meet electricity demand by burning fossil fuels — the crucial question for the climate.

Trump’s answer to that question can perhaps be summed up by the three-word catchphrase he’s deployed on the campaign trail: “Drill, baby, drill.” He is an avowed friend of the fossil fuel industry, from whom he reportedly sought $1 billion in campaign funds at a fundraising dinner, promising in exchange to gut environmental regulations.

Harris is not exactly running on a platform of decarbonization, either. In an effort to win swing votes in the shale-boom heartland of Pennsylvania, she has reversed course on her past opposition to fracking, and she has proudly touted the record levels of oil and gas production seen under the current administration. Despite the risk of nuclear waste, the Biden administration has also championed nuclear power as a carbon-free solution and sought to incentivize the construction of new reactors through subsidies and loans. Although Harris says her administration would not be a continuation of Biden’s, it’s reasonable to expect continuity with Biden’s overall approach of leaning more heavily on incentives for low-emissions energy than restrictions on fossil fuels to further a climate agenda. —Gautama Mehta, Grist environmental justice reporting fellow



Your home improvements

In 2022, the Biden administration handed the American people a great big carrot to incentivize them to decarbonize: the Inflation Reduction Act, or IRA. It provides thousands of dollars in the form of rebates and tax credits for a consumer to get an EV and electrify their home with solar panels, a heat pump, and an induction stove. (Though the funding available for renters is slim, it is out there.) In 2023, 3.4 million Americans got $8.4 billion in tax credits for home energy improvements thanks to the IRA.

If elected, Trump has pledged to rescind the remaining funding, which would require Congress’s support. By contrast, Harris has praised the law (which, as vice president, she famously cast the tie-breaking vote to pass) and would almost certainly veto any attempts by Congress to repeal it. As a presidential candidate, she has not said whether she would expand the law, though many expect she would focus on more efficient implementation.

But while repealing the IRA might slow the steady pace of American households decarbonizing, it can’t stop what’s already in motion. “There are fundamental forces here at work,” said Gernot Wagner, a climate economist at Columbia Business School. “At the end of the day, there’s very little that Trump can do to stand in the way.”

For one, the feds provide guidance to states on how to distribute the money made available through the IRA. More climate-ambitious states are already layering on their own monetary incentives to decarbonize. So even if that IRA money disappeared, states could pick up the slack.

And two, even before the IRA passed, market forces were setting clean energy on a path to replace fossil fuels. The price of solar power dropped by about 90 percent between 2010 and 2020. And like any technology, electric appliances will only get cheaper and better. It might take longer without further support from the federal government, but the American home of tomorrow is, inevitably, fully electric — no matter the next administration. —Matt Simon, Grist senior staff writer focusing on climate solutions



Your home insurance premiums

Whether they know it or not, many Americans are already confronting the costs of a warming world in their monthly bills: In recent years, home insurance premiums have risen across the country, as insurance companies face the fallout of larger and more damaging hurricanes, wildfires, and hailstorms. In some states, like Florida and California, many prominent companies have fled the market altogether. While some Democrats have proposed legislation that would create a federal backstop for these failing insurance markets — with the goal of ensuring that coverage remains available for most homeowners — these proposals have yet to make much headway in a divided Congress. For the moment, it’s state governments, rather than the president or any other national politicians, that have real jurisdiction over homeowner’s insurance prices.

Near the end of the presidential debate in September, when both candidates were asked about what they’d do to “fight climate change,” Harris began her response by referring to “anyone who lives in a state who has experienced these extreme weather occurrences, who now is either being denied home insurance or is being jacked up” as a way to counter Trump’s denials of climate change.

Traditional homeowner policies don’t include flood insurance, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency runs a flood insurance program that serves around 5 million homeowners in the US, mostly along the East Coast. Homeowners in the most flood-prone areas are required to buy this policy, but uptake has been lagging in some particularly vulnerable inland communities — including those that were recently devastated by Hurricane Helene. Project 2025, which many experts believe will serve as the blueprint to a second Trump term (though his campaign disavows any connection to it), imagines FEMA winding down the program altogether, throwing flood coverage to the private market. This would likely make it cheaper to live in risky areas — but it would leave homeowners without financial support after floods, all but ensuring only the rich could rebuild. —Jake Bittle, Grist staff writer focusing on climate impacts and adaptation

Marli Miller/Universal Images Group via Getty Images

Your transportation

The appetite for infrastructure spending is so bipartisan that the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, signed in 2021, has become more widely known as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. But don’t be fooled. A wide gulf separates how Harris and Trump approach transportation, with potentially profound climate implications.

Harris hasn’t offered many specifics, but she has committed to advancing the rollout out of the Biden administration’s infrastructure agenda. That includes traditional efforts like building roads and bridges, mixed with Democratic priorities including union labor and an eye toward climate-resilience. The infrastructure law and the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act include billions in spending to promote the adoption of electric vehicles, produce them domestically, and add at least 500,000 charging stations by 2030. They also include greener transportation efforts aimed at, among other things, electrifying buses, enhancing passenger rail, and expanding mass transit. That said, Harris has not called for the eventual elimination of internal combustion vehicles despite such plans in 12 states.

Trump has also been sparse on details about transportation — his website doesn’t address the issue except to decry Chinese ownership. During his first term and 2020 campaign, he championed (though never produced) a $1 trillion infrastructure plan. It focused on building “gleaming” roads, highways, and bridges, and reducing the environmental review and government oversight of such projects. He has favored flipping the federal-first funding model to shift much of the cost onto states, municipalities, and the private sector. Ultimately, Trump seems to have little interest in a transition to low-carbon transportation — the official 2024 Republican platform calls for rolling back EV mandates — and he remains a vocal supporter of fossil fuel production. —Tik Root, Grist senior staff writer focusing on the clean energy transition



Your health

Rising global temperatures and worsening extreme weather are changing the distribution and prevalence of tick- and mosquito-borne diseases, fungal pathogens, and water-borne bacteria across the US. State and local health departments rely heavily on data and recommendations on these climate-fueled illnesses from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an agency whose director is appointed by the president and can be influenced by the White House.

In his first term, Trump tried to divorce many federal agencies’ research functions from their rulemaking capacities, and there are concerns that, if he wins again in November, Trump would continue that effort. Project 2025, a sweeping blueprint developed by right-wing conservative groups with the aim of influencing a second Trump term, proposes separating the CDC’s disease surveillance efforts from its policy recommendation work, meaning the agency would be able to track the effects of climate change on human health, like the spreading of infectious diseases, but it wouldn’t be able to tell states how to manage them or inform the public about how to stay safe from them.

Harris is expected to leave the CDC intact, but she hasn’t given many signals on how she’d approach climate and health initiatives. Her campaign website says she aims to protect public health, but provides no further clarification or policy position on that subject, or specifically climate change’s influence on it. Over the past four years, the Biden administration has made strides in protecting Americans from extreme heat, the leading cause of weather-related deaths in the US. It proposed new heat protections for indoor and outdoor workers, and it made more than $1 billion in grant funding available to nonprofits, tribes, cities, and states for cooling initiatives such as planting trees in urban areas, which reduce the risk of heat illness. It’s reasonable to expect that a future Harris administration would continue Biden’s work in this area. Harris cast the tie-breaking vote on the IRA, which includes emissions-cutting policies that will lead to less global warming in the long term, benefiting human health not just in the US but worldwide.

But there’s more to be done. Biden established the Office of Climate Change and Health Equity in the first year of his term, but it still hasn’t been funded by Congress. Harris has not said whether she will push for more funding for that office. —Zoya Teirstein, Grist staff writer covering politics and the intersection between climate change and health



Your food prices

Trump’s immigration agenda could also affect food prices. If reelected, Trump has said he would expel millions of undocumented immigrants, many of whom work for low pay on farms and in other parts of the food sector, playing a vital role in food harvesting and processing. Their mass deportation and the resulting labor shortage could drive up prices at the grocery store. Meanwhile, Harris promises to uphold and strengthen the H-2A visa system, the national program that enables agricultural producers to hire foreign-born workers for seasonal work.

Processing Meat A newsletter analyzing how the meat and dairy industries impact everything around us. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

But the winner of the 2024 election can determine how badly climate change batters the food supply in the long run — primarily by controlling greenhouse gas emissions. —Frida Garza, Grist staff writer focusing on the impact of climate change on food and agriculture, and Ayurella Horn-Muller, Grist staff writer focusing on the impact of climate change on food and agriculture.

Grist / Leonard Ortiz / MediaNews Group / Orange County Register via Getty Images



Your drinking water

“I want absolutely immaculate, clean water,” Trump said in June during the first presidential debate this election season. But if a second Trump presidency is anything like the first, there is good reason to worry about the protection of public drinking water.

During his first term in office, the Trump administration repealed the clean water rule, a critical part of the Clean Water Act that limited the amount of pollutants companies could discharge near streams, wetlands, and other sources of water used for public consumption. “It was ready to protect the drinking water of 117 million Americans and then, within a few months of being in office, Donald Trump and [former EPA administrator] Scott Pruitt threw it into the trash bin to appease their polluter allies,” former Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune said in a 2017 press release.

While in office, Trump also secured a conservative majority on the Supreme Court, which last year tipped the court in favor of a decision to vastly limit the Environmental Protection Agency’s power to regulate pollution in certain wetlands, forcing the agency to weaken its own clean water rules.

A Harris administration would likely carry forward the work of several Biden EPA measures to safeguard the public’s drinking water from toxic heavy metals and other contaminants. For example, in April, the EPA passed the nation’s first national drinking water standard to protect an estimated 100 million people from a category of synthetic chemicals known as PFAS, or “forever chemicals,” which have been linked to cancer, high blood pressure, and immune system deficiencies. Enforcing the new standard will require the agency to examine test results from thousands of water systems across the country and follow up to ensure their compliance — an effort that will take place during the next White House administration.

“As president,” Harris’ website says, “she will unite Americans to tackle the climate crisis as she builds on this historic work, advances environmental justice, protects public lands and public health, increases resilience to climate disasters, lowers household energy costs, creates millions of new jobs, and continues to hold polluters accountable to secure clean air and water for all.” Project 2025 indicates that a future Trump administration would eliminate safeguards like the PFAS rule that place limits on industrial emissions and discharges.

Just this month, the EPA issued a groundbreaking rule requiring water utilities to replace virtually every lead pipe in the country within 10 years. With funds from Biden’s bipartisan infrastructure law, the agency will also invest $2.6 billion for drinking water upgrades and lead pipe replacements. Harris has previously spoken out about the dangers of lead pipes, stating at a press conference in 2022 that lead exposure is “an issue that we as a nation should commit to ending.”

The success of these and other measures will rely on a well-staffed EPA enforcement division, which may end up being one of the most insidious stakes of this election for environmental policies. Budget cuts and staff departures during the first Trump administration gutted the EPA’s enforcement capacity — a problem that the agency has spent the past four years trying to mend. Project 2025 “would essentially eviscerate the EPA,” said Stan Meiburg, who served as the EPA’s acting deputy administrator from 2014 to 2017. —Lylla Younes, Grist senior staff writer covering chemical pollution, regulation, and frontline communities



Your clean air

Biden’s clean air policy has been characterized by a spate of new rules to curb toxic air pollution from a variety of facilities, including petroleum coke ovens, synthetic manufacturing facilities, and steel mills. While environmental advocates have decried some of these regulations as insufficiently protective, certain provisions — such as mandatory air monitoring — were hailed as milestones in the history of the agency’s air pollution policy. Former EPA staffer and air pollution expert Scott Throwe told Grist that a Harris- and Democratic-led EPA would continue to build on the work of the past four years by enforcing these new rules, which will require federal oversight of state environmental agencies’ inspection protocols and monitoring data.

Project 2025 proposes a major reorganization of the EPA, which would include the reduction of full-time staff positions and the elimination of departments deemed “superfluous.” It also promotes the rollback of a range of air quality regulations, from ambient air standards for toxic pollutants to greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired power plants.

What’s more, a growing body of research has found that poor air quality is often concentrated in communities of color, which are disproportionately close to fossil fuel infrastructure. Conservative state governments have pushed back against the Biden EPA’s efforts to address “environmental justice” through agency channels and in court — efforts that will likely enjoy more executive support under a second Trump administration. —Lylla Younes, Grist senior staff writer covering chemical pollution, regulation, and frontline communities



Your public lands

Under the Antiquities Act of 1906, a national monument can be created by presidential decree. The act can be a useful tool to protect important landscapes from industries like oil, gas, and even green energy enterprises. Tribal nations have asked numerous presidents to use this executive power to protect tribal homelands that might fall within federal jurisdiction. During his first term, Trump argued that the act also gives the president the implicit power to dissolve a national monument.

In 2017, Trump drastically shrunk two Obama-era designations, Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante in Utah, in what amounted to the biggest slash of federal land protections in the history of the United States. At the time, Trump said “bureaucrats in Washington” should not control what happens to land in Utah. While giving back local control was Trump’s stated rationale, tribes in the area, like the Diné, Ute, Hopi, and Zuni, had been working for years to protect the two iconic and culturally significant sites. Meanwhile, his decision opened up the land for oil and gas development. While not all tribal nations are opposed to oil and gas production, tribal environmental advocates are worried that a second Trump term will erode federal environmental regulations and commitments to progress in the fight against climate change.

Since 2021, the Biden administration has put more than 42 million acres of land into conservation by creating and expanding national monuments. This includes the Baaj Nwaavjo I’tah Kukveni, a new monument spanning a million acres near the Grand Canyon — the kind of protection that tribal activists for years had worked to prevent industrial uranium mining. And just this month, the administration announced the creation of the Chumash Heritage National Marine Sanctuary — a 4,500-square-mile national marine sanctuary to be “managed with tribal, Indigenous community involvement.”

But Harris might not continue that legacy. While she has remained silent about what she would do to protect lands, she has been vocal about continuing the US’s oil and gas production as well as a push for more mining to help with the green transition — like copper from Oak Flat in Arizona and lithium from Thacker Pass in Nevada — both important places to tribal communities in the area. Tribes have been subjected to the adverse effects of the energy crisis before — namely dams that destroyed swaths of homelands and nuclear energy that increased cancer rates of Southwest tribal members — and without specific protections, it’s easy to see green energy as a changing of the guard instead of a game changer. —Taylar Dawn Stagner, Grist Indigenous affairs reporting fellow

Chandan Khanna/AFP via Getty Images A woman cleans her house after Hurricane Helene made landfall in Cedar Key, Florida.



Your next climate disaster

Congress controls how much money FEMA receives for relief efforts after catastrophic events like hurricanes Helene and Milton, but the president holds significant sway over who receives money and when. A second Trump administration would likely curtail some of the climate-focused resiliency projects FEMA has pursued in recent years, such as cutting back money for infrastructure that would be more resilient against hazards like sea level rises, fires, and earthquakes. Republican firebrands, like US Rep. Scott Perry from Pennsylvania, have decried these projects as wasteful and unnecessary.

Under the Stafford Act, which governs federal disaster response, the president has the power to disburse relief to specific parts of the country after any “major disaster” — hurricanes, big floods, fires. In September, Trump suggested he might make disaster aid contingent on political support if he returns to office, promising to withhold wildfire support from California unless state officials give more irrigation water to Central Valley farmers. Harris has not given an explicit indication of how she would fund climate-resiliency or disaster-response programs, though she has boosted FEMA’s recovery efforts following Helene and Milton. —Jake Bittle, Grist staff writer focusing on climate impacts and adaptation



Your understanding of climate change

The United States has long been a leader in research essential to understanding — and responding to — a warming world. The government plays a key role in advancing climate science and providing timely meteorological data to the public. Neither Trump nor Harris address this in their platform, but history yields clues to what their presidency might mean for this vital work.

Trump has consistently dismissed climate change as a “hoax” and downplayed scientific consensus that it is anthropogenic, or driven by human activities. As president, he gutted funding for research, appointed climate skeptics and industry insiders, and eliminated scientific advisory committees from several federal agencies. Thousands of government scientists quit in response. (In fact, still reeling from Trump’s attacks, new union contracts protect scientific integrity to combat such meddling.) His administration censored scientific data on government websites and tried to undermine the findings of the National Climate Assessment, the government’s scientific report on the risks and impacts of climate change. If reelected, Trump would almost certainly adopt a similar strategy, deprioritizing climate science and potentially even restructuring or eliminating federal agencies that advance it.

Harris has long supported climate action: As senator, she co-sponsored the Green New Deal, and, as vice president, cast the deciding vote to pass the Inflation Reduction Act, which bolstered funding for agencies that oversee climate research. As part of its “whole of government” approach to the crisis, the Biden administration created the National Climate Task Force, with the EPA, NASA, and others to ensure science informs policy. Although Harris hasn’t said much about climate change as a candidate, climate organizations generally support her campaign and believe her administration will build on the progress made so far. —Sachi Kitajima Mulkey, Grist climate news reporting fellow



Your electric bill

A lot goes into calculating the energy rates you see on your monthly electric bill — construction and maintenance of power plants, fuel costs, and much more. It’s pretty tough to draw a direct line from the president to your bill, so if you’re worried about your energy costs, you’d do well to read up on your local public utility commission, municipal electric authority, or electric membership cooperative board.

What the president can do, though, is appoint people to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), the board of up to five individuals who regulate the transmission of utilities across the entire country. As the US continues to shift away from fossil fuels, a fundamental problem stands in the way: The country’s aging and fragmented grid lacks the capacity to move all of the electricity being generated from renewable sources. In May, FERC, which currently has a Democratic majority, approved a rule to try to solve that issue — it voted to require that regional utilities identify opportunities for upgrading the capacities of existing transmission infrastructure and that regional grid operators forecast their transmission needs 20 years into the future. These steps will be essential for utility companies to take advantage of the subsidies offered in the IRA and bipartisan infrastructure law.

But the rule is facing legal challenges, which like much else in US courts, appear to be political. So even if Harris wins the presidency, and maintains a commission that prioritizes the transition away from fossil fuels, the oil and gas industry and the politicians who support it will not acquiesce easily.

If Trump wins, he’d have the chance to appoint a new FERC chair from among the current commissioners and to appoint a new commissioner in 2026, when the current chair’s term ends. (Or possibly sooner.) Although FERC’s actions tend to be more insulated from changes in the White House because commissioners serve five-year terms, a commission led by new Trump appointees would most likely deprioritize initiatives that would upgrade the grid to support clean energy adoption. Trump’s appointees supported fossil fuel interests on several fronts during his previous term, for instance by counteracting state subsidies to favor coal and gas plants. —Emily Jones, Grist regional reporter, Georgia, and Izzy Ross, Grist regional reporter, Great Lakes

Courtest of Grist/Mario Tama/Getty Images



Your trash

Some 33 billion pounds of plastic waste enter the marine environment globally every year, and the problem is expected to worsen as the fossil fuel and petrochemical industries ramp up plastic production.

Perhaps the most important step the next president could take to curb plastic pollution is to push Congress to ratify and implement the United Nations’ global plastics treaty, which is scheduled to be finalized by the end of this year. In August, Biden administration announced its support for a version of the treaty that limits plastic production, and, though Harris hasn’t made any public comment about it, experts expect that her administration would support it as well. Meanwhile, a former Trump White House official told Politico in April that Trump — who famously withdrew the US from the Paris Agreement in his first term — would take a “hard-nosed look” at any outcome of the plastics negotiations and be “skeptical that the agreement reached was the best agreement that could have been reached.”

Trump, meanwhile, does not have a strong track record on plastic. Although he signed a law to remove and prevent ocean litter, he has taken personal credit for the construction of new plastic manufacturing facilities and derided the idea of banning single-use plastic straws. And Trump’s “drill, baby, drill” agenda could increase the extraction of fossil fuels used to make plastics. —Joseph Winters, Grist staff writer covering plastics, pollution, and the circular economy



Your votes

After decades of failed attempts to tackle the climate crisis, Congress finally passed major legislation two years ago with the Inflation Reduction Act. Not a single Republican voted for it.

Elections aren’t just important for getting the legislative power needed to enact climate policies — they’re also important for implementing them. The IRA and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, another key climate-related law, are entering crucial phases for their implementation, particularly the doling out of billions of dollars for clean energy, environmental justice, and climate resiliency. Trump, having vowed to rescind unspent IRA funds if elected, seems poised to hamper the law’s rollout, slowing efforts to get the country using more clean energy.

But it’s a mistake to imagine that only federal elections matter when it comes to climate change. Eliminating greenhouse gases from energy, buildings, transportation, and food systems requires legislation at every level. In Arizona and Montana, for example, voters this year will elect utility commissioners, the powerful, yet largely ignored officials who play a crucial role in whether — and how quickly — the country moves away from fossil fuels. State legislators can also open the door to efforts to get 100 percent clean electricity, as happened in Michigan and Minnesota after the 2022 election. Even in a state like Washington with Democratic Gov. Jay Inslee, who once campaigned for the White House on a climate change platform, votes matter — climate action is literally on the ballot in November, when voters could choose to kill the state’s landmark price on carbon pollution.

Depending on what happens with the presidential and congressional races, state, and local action might be the best hope for furthering climate policy anyway. —Kate Yoder, Grist staff writer examining the intersections of climate, language, history, culture, and accountability



Your global outlook

During his first term, Trump pulled the US out of the Paris Agreement, a global commitment to reduce the burning of fossil fuels in an effort to curb the worst impacts of climate change. “I was elected to represent the citizens of Pittsburgh, not Paris,” he said from the Rose Garden of the White House in 2017. Trump didn’t entirely abandon global climate discussions — his administration continued to attend global climate conferences, where it endorsed events on fossil fuels.

“In order to keep our critical 1.5 degree-Celsius goal within reach,” she said, “we must have the ambition to meet this moment, to accelerate our ongoing work, increase our investments, and lead with courage and conviction.”

But both the Trump and Biden administrations achieved record oil and gas production during their time in office, and Harris opposes a ban on fracking. In order to make a dent in the climate crisis, whoever becomes president would have to reject that status quo and put serious money behind global promises to mitigate climate change. Otherwise, climate change-related losses will just continue to mount — already, they are expected to cost $580 billion globally by 2030. —Anita Hofschneider, Grist senior staff writer focusing on Indigenous affairs

Sign up for the Explain It to Me newsletter The newsletter is part of Vox’s Explain It to Me. Each week, we tackle a question from our audience and deliver a digestible explainer from one of our journalists. Have a question you want us to answer? Ask us here.
Latino voters in focus as Trump and Harris sketch out the campaign's final 2 weeks

toggle caption AP/AP

There are only two more Tuesdays left in the 2024 presidential election, and both former President Donald Trump and Vice President Harris’ campaign schedules are filling up with focused stops in key swing states — and beyond.

Both candidates spent part of Tuesday continuing to make their appeals to Latino voters: Trump with a panel discussion at his golf resort in Miami, and Harris in taping an interview with Telemundo that will air Wednesday.

Trump spent the day falsely claiming Harris was taking a day off from campaigning before holding a nighttime rally in Greensboro, North Carolina, his fourth event in two days in a state that has become a must-win for his White House hopes.

Harris spent Tuesday in Washington, D.C., sitting down with NBC News for an interview as well, while former President Barack Obama rallied in Wisconsin with Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Walz and in Michigan with native son Eminem.

Sponsor Message

Twenty million people have already cast their ballot in the 2024 presidential election, according to the University of Florida’s Election Lab, including more than 1 in 4 active Georgia voters.

Harris talked policy while Obama rallied in the Midwest

toggle caption Jacquelyn Martin/AFP via Getty Images

Harris continued to outline how she would govern if elected, as the campaign seeks to push back on criticism of the number and type of interviews she has done.

In an interview on NBC Nightly News, Harris answered a broad range of questions about her policy proposals and the contrast between herself and Trump.

Harris pointed to Trump’s actions during the January 6th insurrection, and said he tried to undo the will of the voters.

“This is a serious matter. The American people are at this point two weeks out, being presented with a very, very serious decision about what will be the future of our country," she said.

Asked if she would pardon Trump if she won the White House and he was convicted in the federal election interference case against him, Harris refused to engage.

“I’m not going to get into those hypotheticals,” she said. “I’m focused on the next 14 days.”

Harris also declined to say whether she would make concessions, such as religious exemptions, to get the support of some Republican senators to quickly pass a law enshrining abortion access.

“I'm not going to go down that rabbit hole with you right now,” she said.

In her interview with Telemundo, Harris focused more specifically on her outreach to Latino voters.

Sponsor Message

“A lot of my agenda is about creating opportunity for people to succeed,” Harris said in a preview of the sitdown that posted Tuesday night.

Harris planned to use the interview to announce a series of policies geared toward Latino men. Those measures include a plan to double the number of registered apprenticeships and remove college degree requirements for up to 500,000 federal jobs.

The Harris campaign said the vice president would also provide 1 million forgivable loans worth up to $20,000 each for Latino and other entrepreneurs, and set a goal to more than double the number of first-time Latino homebuyers to nearly 600,000.

toggle caption Kamil Krzaczynski/AFP via Getty Images

Meanwhile on the campaign trail, Walz and Obama were in Madison, Wisconsin to mark the first day of early voting in the state.

The Minnesota governor railed against Trump’s campaign stop to a McDonald’s over the weekend so he could work the fryer.

"There is something not just nuts, but cruel about a billionaire using people’s livelihoods as a political prop," Walz said.

Speaking in Detroit, Obama said that Trump was incompetent and only wanting the power of the presidency as a means to an end, urging voters to support Harris because “we do not need to see what an older, loonier Donald Trump looks like with no guard rails.”

“Donald Trump wants us to think that this country is hopelessly divided between us and them,” he said. “And ‘us’ for him is the ‘real Americans’ who support him, and everybody else who doesn’t, that’s ‘them’ — that’s the enemy.”

Speaking from New Hampshire on Tuesday, President Biden similarly sought to frame Trump as a threat to democracy, telling an audience at a Democratic campaign office in Concord, "We got to lock him up." He quickly clarified to explain he was speaking figuratively. "Politically lock him up. Lock him out. That’s what we have to do," Biden said.

Sponsor Message

The remark drew quick condemnation from the Trump campaign.

"Joe Biden just admitted the truth: he and Kamala’s plan all along has been to politically persecute their opponent President Trump because they can’t beat him fair and square. The Harris-Biden Admin is the real threat to democracy. We call on Kamala Harris to condemn Joe Biden’s disgraceful remark," Karoline Leavitt, the national press secretary for the Trump campaign, said in a statement.



Trump is doubling down, especially on immigration

toggle caption Chandan Khanna/AFP via Getty Images

In Florida, Trump argued at a roundtable that the economy was better for Latinos during his four years in office, but often veered off topic. He lobbed personal attacks against Harris, calling her “lazy,” “slow” and “low IQ.”

While Latino voters have historically supported Democrats in greater numbers, Republicans hope Trump’s central focus on immigration issues and border security will help peel away support from a crucial bloc of voters.

His rhetoric around immigration and its effect on the country continues to be dire, even outside his rally settings.

“We can't take a chance at losing this election, because if we lose this election, we may not have a country anymore,” he said.

At his Greensboro, North Carolina rally, Trump continued to call migrants who enter the country illegally part of an “invasion,” vowed to oversee mass deportations and blamed Harris for violent crimes committed by some migrants in the U.S.

He spoke for nearly two hours and mixed in his usual prepared remarks from the teleprompter with lengthy asides, including boasts about his crowd size and a melancholic reflection that his time on the campaign trail is coming to an end, both for this election and potentially for good.

“It's sad, because we're sort of wrapping it up, you know that, right?,” he said. “We've been doing this for a long time. We had two unbelievable elections ... when you think, we've been doing it for, from 2015 and now we're where we are.”

Sponsor Message

Trump, who would be the oldest person to become president if he wins, has also seen an increase in verbal gaffes and distracting non sequiturs in his speeches recently. Tuesday night, he appeared to forget the word “fryer” when talking about his McDonald’s stop and mistakenly called a segment of loyal superfans known as the “Front Row Joes” the “Front Row Jacks” and “Front Row Jacks and Joes.”

“Those french fries were good,” he said. “They were right out of the — they were right out of whatever the hell they make ‘em out of.”



The final countdown for both campaigns

With 14 days to go until voting closes, the time, place and focus of each event added to the calendar gives insight into the campaigns’ closing messages and priorities to get out the vote.

Trump will headline a Turning Point USA rally in suburban Gwinnett County, Ga. Wednesday while Harris tapes a town hall with CNN in Chester Township, Pa. Thursday, Harris also heads to Gwinnett County to rally voters with Obama and Bruce Springsteen.

The Harris campaign announced Tuesday that the vice president will travel to Houston, Texas on Friday to discuss how the state’s abortion restrictions have hurt women — and to pin the blame for that on Trump. The event is also aimed at boosting support for Rep. Colin Allred, D-Texas, who is challenging Republican Ted Cruz for his Senate seat.

Trump also announced multiple rallies in Pennsylvania and Michigan later this week, joining events planned in Nevada and Arizona before holding an event at Madison Square Garden in New York.

NPR’s Danielle Kurtzleben, Franco Ordoñez and Deepa Shivaram contributed reporting.
It’s a six-word maxim coined by New York University journalism professor Jay Rosen: “Not the odds, but the stakes.” The phrase is intended to remind news organizations and media professionals that when covering an election, it’s important not just to tell the public who’s likely to win, but also to explain to voters what’s at stake in the race.

With this in mind, Americans need to know that in the 2024 elections, the stakes related to the courts couldn’t be much higher. It’s a point Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Walz appeared eager to emphasize during a campaign rally in Wisconsin.

“It’s already Donald Trump’s Supreme Court,” the Minnesota governor said. “[The justices] have effectively given him total immunity to do whatever he wants as president. Think about this: In the next four years, if he gets elected, he could appoint up to three more justices. ... That would mean that Donald Trump will have appointed six of the nine Supreme Court justices.”

It’s not just Democrats who are thinking along these lines.

Sen. Lindsey Graham appeared on Fox News late last week and said that if the GOP fares well on Election Day, “it changes the future of the Supreme Court.” In the same on-air appearance, the South Carolina Republican added that if Trump returns to power and works with a GOP-led Senate, “we can have a generation of conservatives on The Supreme Court. This is a very big deal to shape the court for the next generation.”

On this, the senator and I agree: This is a very big deal.

Graham’s presidential candidate has been unsubtle about his ambitions in this area. This was the message Trump delivered to a group of politically conservative Christian activists in North Carolina on Monday: “I will once again appoint rock-solid, pro-constitutional judges to faithfully interpret the law and the Constitution. The 300 judges that we appointed changed the whole — I mean, it was so bad.”

To be sure, the former president exaggerated the number of jurists he successfully added to the judiciary, but the underlying point remains the same: Trump appointed a brutal number of far-right ideologues — including many young and inexperienced conservatives of dubious qualifications — to the high court, the appellate courts and the district courts.

He’s also eager to add to that record. The Wall Street Journal reported two weeks ago:

A rising faction within the conservative legal movement is laying the groundwork for Donald Trump to appoint judges who prioritize loyalty to him and aggressively advocate for dismantling the federal government should he win a second term. ... Trump has gravitated to more-combative lawyers outside the conservative legal establishment who have said they want to hobble regulatory agencies and concentrate power in the White House.

It was against this backdrop that the Republican candidate boasted over the summer about his plans to “totally transform the federal bench.”

I’m mindful of the fact that the number of voters nationwide who consider the future of the courts a top voting priority is very small. But whether the electorate prioritizes the issue or not, the more Trump succeeds in pushing the judiciary even further to the right, the more it will affect Americans’ lives in direct and meaningful ways.
With Election Day quickly approaching, both campaigns are ramping up efforts to court one of the most coveted voting blocs this cycle: Black Americans. As Donald Trump and the Republican Party continue to make a play for the typically Democratic constituency, Vice President Kamala Harris recently unveiled a new set of policy proposals called the “Opportunity Agenda for Black Men.”

“No one else is going to persuade us. We’re two weeks out and we won’t sleep until Nov. 6.”

According to a new poll from Howard University, 82% of Black voters in battleground states say they’ll vote for Harris this November, while 12% say they’ll vote for Trump. Another 5% remain undecided. The survey found Trump’s gains were most prominent among Black men under 50, with more than 20% planning to support the former president.

This week, Alex Wagner sat down with a group of Black Trump supporters in the battleground state of Pennsylvania who call themselves the “Black Republicans Club of Philadelphia.”

“We’re voting for Donald Trump unequivocally, period,” one of the group’s members, Dr. Prince Johnakin, told Wagner. “No one else is going to persuade us. We’re two weeks out, and we won’t sleep until Nov. 6.”

Natalie Garcia, another Trump supporter, explained why she’s backing the former president, “He’s more strong, strong-minded in a way,” Garcia told Wagner. “He’s focused on what we gotta focus on. He doesn’t play — that’s what I respect about him. He always just stands for what he believes and he doesn’t go back, no matter how many people are bashing him.”

Pastor Philip Fisher echoed Garcia’s comments, telling Wagner “[Trump] doesn’t take BS.”

“He’s not gonna hear it,” Fisher said. “He’s a businessman. He’s not there for the fluff talk of politics. We need someone strong. We need someone who’s gonna get down to business and take care of what this country needs. But also understands what the community needs.”

Another Trump voter, Amsar Butt, told Wagner the Democratic Party takes minority voters for granted, “They think Republicans are so out of touch with what the minorities need so [voters] don’t have a choice. I think that’s gonna be a big surprise [on Election Day.]”

Robert Williams shared Butt’s feelings on the Democratic Party. “A lot of people just walking down the street are not feeling the Democrats,” he told Wagner.

"The Black men that don’t vote for Democrats, it’s not what Mr. Trump did, it’s [because] they have been disappointed with [Democrats],” he said. Williams, who did not describe himself as a Republican, told Wagner his vote for Trump was a vote for “the lesser of two evils.”

When Wagner asked the group what issues mattered most to them this election cycle, many cited immigration, including Dorian Urizar. “I’m Guatemalan,” he said. “For us, seeing the new immigrants come in, they’re more violent, there’s more chaos…We’ve been here for longer than them and it’s starting to affect us more … They’re making us look bad.”

When Wagner asked Urizar if he supports Trump’s proposal for mass deportation, he told her the plan is “a little bit iffy.”

“I wouldn’t say I support it wholeheartedly,” he said. “But I do think it’s a good idea for the new immigrants coming in because they are the problem.” As Wagner pointed out, studies have shown immigrants are less likely to commit crimes than U.S.-born Americans.

One Trump voter told Wagner the Democratic Party takes minority voters for granted.

The voters were also asked about sexism possibly motivating the lower rates of Black male support for Harris.

“Most men, they love their mothers, they love their wives … they respect the women,” Justice Felix told Wagner. She went on to say she believes the vice president does not have the qualifications or education to run America.

Harris’ resume is extensive. She graduated from Howard University before attending the University of California, Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco. Before she became vice president, Harris was the district attorney of San Francisco, the attorney general of California and a U.S. senator.

Crystal Canty, who told Wagner she does not identify as a feminist, said she’s not supporting Harris because, “at the end of the day, I don’t think she has the personality.”

“I don’t think that she has what it takes to go up against Putin and go up against these other presidents that are built for it,” Canty said. “I want my president to feel secure and manly.”

As Wagner noted, these voters do not reflect the majority of Black voters in the city:

“To be clear, the voters I spoke to are not representative of Black voters in Philadelphia as a whole,” Wagner said. “Black voters are expected to support Kamala Harris by wide margins this election. The question is, how many voters from this blue county can Donald Trump tick off?”
Sky News’ deputy political editor Sam Coates and Politico’s Jack Blanchard share their daily guide to the day ahead in politics in under 20 minutes.

Donald Trump has filed a legal complaint against the Labour Party, accusing it of interfering in the US election after activists travelled to the US to support his rival Kamala Harris. Jack and Sam discuss if the row could jeopardise the government’s relationship with the Republican candidate.

Plus, the Commons will hear a statement today on the Chris Kaba case after a police officer was cleared of his murder.

Meanwhile, the government has signed a new security pact with Germany and Jack and Sam have the latest on the budget.

👉 Tap here to listen to Politics At Jack And Sam’s wherever you get your podcasts 👈

You can send a WhatsApp to Jack and Sam on 07511 867 633 or email them: [email protected]
Eventually, the review section was disabled by Yelp and, at the time of this reporting, it remains this way.

A notice on the page reads: "This business recently received increased public attention, which often means people come to this page to post their views on the news. While we don’t take a stand one way or the other when it comes to this incident, we’ve temporarily disabled the posting of content to this page as we work to investigate whether the content you see here reflects actual consumer experiences rather than the recent events. Please note that we apply this same policy regardless of the business and regardless of the topic at issue."
In a statement to Politico's Playbook, Trump's national press secretary Karoline Leavitt denied reports that the former president is " exhausted ."

"President Trump is running laps around Kamala Harris on the campaign trail," she said. “And has done media interviews every day this week. He has more energy and a harder work ethic than anyone in politics.” Leavitt asserted that Trump "has never backed down from any interview."
U.S. Steel’s decline nearly killed this town. Its sale could save it

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

BRADDOCK, Pa. – Smoke spewing from an Edgar Thomson Works smokestack wafts over southwest Pennsylvania’s Monongahela River.

Carnegie Steel began operating the massive mill in 1875, and it has produced continuously since U.S. Steel incorporated in 1901.

At its peak, U.S. Steel employed about 340,000 workers, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported on the company's 100-year anniversary . Thousands of families from Pittsburgh, Braddock and the Mon Valley region relied on the company for work.

As the steel industry evolved and declined, though, jobs were cut. Company officials say that the once-booming enterprise now employs about 4,000 people in this area; Edgar Thomson Works employs about 650 workers.

Sponsor Message

Many Braddock residents who once worked there left. The borough’s population fell from a high of about 20,000 in 1920 to about 1,700 today. Most of the residents are Black and aging.

The proposed sale of the once mighty U.S. Steel for more than $14 billion to a Japanese company casts a shadow over Braddock’s future just as the nearly two-mile long rusted and weathered facility does over the town’s main road.

With days to go before the election, many residents here are concerned that they’ve gone unheard by the national figures vying to lead the country. Both former president Donald Trump and Vice President Harris have opposed the sale to Nippon Steel of Japan, but some feel that allowing it would be better for Braddock and the region.

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

Braddock borough manager Lou Ransom Jr. is one of them. He said he understands why opposing the sale is politically favorable, but he is concerned that blocking it would jeopardize the town’s financial stability.

Selling U.S. Steel to its potential foreign buyer is one way to make the most of the situation while it’s still viable, as Ransom sees it. He worries that selling the company to a U.S. buyer could deal a major blow to Braddock’s tax base if a buyer decided to close the mill altogether.

U.S. Steel is the largest owner of land in Braddock, meaning it foots the largest property tax bill, Ransom said.

“Having an American name on top doesn’t necessarily mean it’s going to be the best for the local economies and the boroughs in general,” Ransom said.

Nippon Steel has pledged to invest about $1.3 billion into the four Mon Valley Works facilities U.S. Steel operates in Pennsylvania, three of which are on the outskirts of Pittsburgh.

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

In a statement to NPR, U.S. Steel said it remains in support of the sale and that it “will strengthen the American steel industry, American jobs, and American supply chains, and enhance the U.S. steel industry's competitiveness and resilience against China.”

Sponsor Message

The company pointed to an impact study it commissioned that found the investment could generate about 5,000 construction jobs and millions of dollars in state and local taxes.

The sale was first proposed late last year. President Biden opposed it, even going so far as threatening to block it, citing national security concerns .

The United Steelworkers national union also opposed it and argued unsuccessfully before an arbitration court that the Japanese would-be owners didn’t understand the commitment needed to the workers – current and retired – and the surrounding communities. The union also expressed concerns about enforcement of labor practices and financial transparency and stated support for selling to a U.S. buyer.

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

Ransom, who has managed the borough for about a year now, grew up on the northside of Pittsburgh. He recalls when Edgar Thomson Works employed thousands more workers and the smokestacks emitted so much that it was hard to see the sky, with soot sticking everywhere – something that has drawn environmental and air quality concerns for decades .

The sale itself might not be enough. Ransom believes the town needs a way to incorporate into the Pittsburgh region’s future.

“The jobs we had from steel are not coming back,” Ransom said. “The type of production that economy had in the past is not going to return because we have automation and technology that precludes you from building a workforce based on manufacturing the way that it was.”

Across the street from the steel mill, potential change and diversification of Braddock’s economy is directly visible. A sign featuring two steelworkers and a mill ladle, carrying molten steel, hangs on the outer brick wall of Braddock Public House. “Braddock” flashes in neon red underneath the homage to the mill’s history.

The eatery, which opened about a month ago, is the second local venture from co-owners Alaina Webber, 33, and Matt Katase, 34. They lease the building from U.S. Sen. John Fetterman, who rose to political prominence after serving as Braddock’s mayor for 13 years.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

Fetterman visited Carnegie Mellon in 2014, when Katase said he was a student there, and “talked about Braddock and this kind of urban frontier and kind of pitched Braddock as this arts haven.”

Sponsor Message

Katase, originally from Hawaii, wanted to open a business and felt like Braddock was the place to do it.

They first opened Brew Gentlemen, a brewery less than a mile down the road, 10 years ago. The brewery’s products are distributed across Pittsburgh and parts of Pennsylvania.

Webber, a Duquesne University graduate who grew up in Pittsburgh, said they designed Braddock Public House with the town’s history in mind. She often hears about its past as a thriving steel town with shopping and entertainment. The eatery occupies a building that was once home to one of the first indoor Chevy dealerships in the U.S.

The old saying, according to nostalgic customers, was that “if you couldn’t get it in Braddock, you couldn’t get it anywhere,” Webber said.

toggle caption Obed Manuel/NPR

In recent years, some artists have moved to the borough and found studio spaces to work out of. More businesses have opened. And last year, Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro ended the borough’s “distressed municipality status” after officials here eliminated its operational deficits and improved its overall financial standing.

Katase and Webber said they participate in town fundraisers and try to find other ways – apart from making sure their sister ventures pay taxes– to benefit local residents.

But the Edgar Thomson plant plays an outsized role in the borough, and the thought of it closing weighs on them.

“That mill is a big ugly chunk of steel to some people, but we think it's beautiful and mysterious and crazy,” Webber said. “It's also a presence and a real foundation. And this town has already gone through depopulation. We don't need to see it to know that that closing would also have an effect. We've seen it once already.”

The uncertain trajectory Braddock is on now is why Ransom wants to see the borough evolve with Pittsburgh.

Sponsor Message

“Steel is a big part of the history, but steel has left for the most part,” Ransom said. “There’s a lot of medicine, there’s a lot of art, there’s a lot of technology.”

toggle caption Nate Smallwood for NPR

He would like to see his borough collaborate with other nearby municipalities, like Rankin to the west and North Braddock and East Pittsburgh to the east, on services like police and trash collection.

He feels Braddock could build on its central location and essentially serve as the “main street” for the area.

Reviving Braddock beyond the steel deal, he believes, will require all of it – the sale of U.S. Steel, local investment and collaboration – because “a rising tide raises all ships.”

This story is part of "We, The Voters," NPR's election series reported from the seven swing states that will most likely decide the 2024 election.

This story was edited by Majd Al-Waheidi.
FORT DEFIANCE, Ariz. — At an elementary school way out in rural northeastern Arizona, on a sunny Saturday afternoon, the Incredible Hulk was signing autographs.

Hulk was a huge draw in this remote community in Navajo Nation. Hundreds of people turned out for a chance to meet him — well, the actor who plays him in the latest Marvel movies, Mark Ruffalo — at the Tséhootsooí Primary Learning Center. People drove as far as 19 hours, across state lines and with cars full of kids. Some adults even admitted that while they came for the official gathering, an Indigenous voter mobilization event, they wouldn’t turn down a chance to meet a famous actor.

Advertisement

“I’m an active voter. I don’t think that’s enough these days. So, I try to be more than just that,” said Hondo Louis, 50, who was peering around a tree for a Ruffalo sighting as he spoke. “But also, having a celebrity who’s going to lend support to something I believe in.”

Everyone came for an activity, too: a 3-mile walk to a local polling station. Early voting in the state had begun a few days earlier, and residents of all ages — teens on skateboards, elders in wheelchairs — brought their ballots to cast at Fort Defiance Road Yard, a facility that would be open specially for the event.

Ahead of the walk, people talked loosely about what mattered to them in the election. Women’s rights. Better roads. Broadband service.

Most of the attendees live in Navajo Nation, the largest Native American reservation in the country. It is roughly the size of West Virginia and home to nearly 400,000 registered tribal members across three states. Poverty is high. College graduates are scarce. Nearly 1 in 5 people don’t have health insurance. Huge swaths of land haven’t been developed at all, offering drivers stunning views of mesas and desert vegetation on the long and dusty roads between towns.

Advertisement

It took HuffPost 13 hours to get to Window Rock, the capital of the reservation, from Washington, D.C., and another 13 hours to get back. The closest major airport is in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and that’s still two and a half hours away by car.

Most of Navajo Nation is based in northeast Arizona, a pivotal state that Kamala Harris and Donald Trump are fighting to win in these final weeks before the presidential election. Tribes here could be key to deciding who wins.

President Joe Biden won Arizona by just over 10,000 votes in 2020, thanks in part to a huge spike in Indigenous voter turnout. In particular, voters in Apache, Navajo and Coconino counties ― all of which overlap with Navajo Nation ― cast more than 52,000 votes, helping Biden become the first Democrat to win the state since 1996. In Navajo County alone, roughly 66% of registered voters in Navajo precincts voted, which was nearly a 13% increase over the previous presidential election. More than 83% of voters in Navajo Nation precincts went for Biden over Trump.

This isn’t lost on Harris and Trump, who are locked in a tight race and heavily courting voters in Arizona. Both campaigns have teams on the ground targeting tribes, and both candidates have descended on the state in the last couple of weeks.

Harris held an Oct. 10 rally in Chandler, where she met with Native American youth leaders from across the state. Her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, was in Arizona on Oct. 9 to visit the Gila River Indian Reservation. Trump was in Prescott Valley on Oct. 13, and his running mate, Ohio Sen. JD Vance, held events in Tucson and Mesa earlier in the month, too.

Advertisement

But neither Republican engaged directly with tribes during their visit.

During HuffPost’s visit to Navajo Nation, it was clear that Harris is resonating here more than Trump. On the lone highway into Window Rock, two massive billboards stuck out in an otherwise vast landscape of mountains and scrub plants. Both featured distinct images of Trump’s eyes, and underneath, warnings of the threat he poses to women’s reproductive rights and of his ties to Project 2025, the conservative Heritage Foundation’s far-right policy roadmap for a second Trump presidency.

And during Saturday’s walk, where lots of people carried signs celebrating the power of their vote, a few specifically advocated for one candidate: Harris.

“I’ve heard enough. And I’ve read enough. And I’m a motivated voter. And I know B.S. when I hear it,” said Louis, who suggested he didn’t trust Trump. “I feel like I can look somebody in the eye and decide really quickly if they’ve got my vote. Harris and Walz got my vote.”

Hundreds of Indigenous voters and allies walk to the polls Saturday afternoon in Fort Defiance, Arizona. Sharon Chischilly for HuffPost

The voter march, called “Walk to the Polls: Honoring 100 Years of Citizenship and Beyond,” was organized by Protect the Sacred, a group focused on empowering Indigenous youth. Navajo native Allie Redhorse Young launched it in 2020 to mobilize young people to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in Navajo Nation, which was devastated by the pandemic. She has since expanded the group’s focus to civic engagement and voting.

Advertisement

Young’s primary goal is to bring the voting process to Navajo people, many of whom would otherwise have to travel long distances — some as far as 140 miles round trip to the nearest post office — just to register. Lots of people on the reservation still have no water or electricity at home, never mind access to the internet.

“It’s incredibly hard to organize in a rural reservation community, especially around voting,” she told HuffPost. “That’s what I’ve learned in four years of doing this. But I’m constantly telling those funders out there, ‘You guys are neglecting an important voting bloc, and resources need to come to our communities because we make the difference. We do.’”

Young noted that Navajo Nation is 27,000 square miles, most of which is in Arizona, and about 170,000 Navajos still live on the reservation.

“That’s a lot of people we’re not engaging with,” she said. “I’ve had people say, ‘Why can’t we just put on an event in Phoenix?’ No, because our people live five hours from there.”

Some people drove in from much farther away than Phoenix for Young’s event. Maggie Sam, 34, came in from Blanding, Utah, and brought her 19-year-old daughter, Natural Yellowman. Both were clearly excited to meet Ruffalo but said they were eager to vote, too. Both planned to vote for Harris.

Advertisement

“I stand by a lot of things she represents herself, and for us too,” said Sam. “And I really don’t really like the other opponent. So, she has my vote.”

She said it matters a lot to her that Harris is a woman of color, even as Harris has leaned out from showcasing her identity on the campaign trail.

“She’s a minority. And we are too,” said Sam. “We’re brown-skinned.”

Yellowman, who will be a first-time voter, said the first video she saw of Harris was of her talking about women’s rights. She said it really affected her.

“I like that a lot,” said Yellowman, who was holding a painting of the Hulk that she made and planned to give to Ruffalo. “I feel more drawn to her.”

Asked which was more exciting to her, meeting a movie star or voting for Harris, the 19-year-old said softly, “Both.”

Advertisement

A young Indigenous woman skateboards through the Walk to the Polls event, bound for a polling center in Fort Defiance, Arizona. Jen Bendery

Protect the Sacred’s strategy is pretty simple: Young hosts fun and culturally relevant events that draw out Indigenous youth, and while they’re there, gets them registered to vote. This year, for the first time, Young teamed up with a grassroots group, Arizona Native Vote, to manage voter registration and to stay engaged with event attendees well after the events are over.

Think of it as a one-two punch for Indigenous civic engagement: Protect the Sacred puts together exciting events that young people want to come to, and Arizona Native Vote connects with them while they’re there and adds them to its voter database. It then stays in touch with them year-round to keep them involved and active.

“We do, like, the cool event, and [Arizona Native Vote is] there to do that work,” said Young. “What I realized — because in 2020 and 2022, we were doing similar events — is, what difference are we going to make if we get people to the polls and they’re not registered to vote?”

“So I said, OK, we’ve got to put in the work on the voter registration side,” she said.

Last month, Protect the Sacred held a “Skate for Democracy” event in Tuba City, featuring a skateboarding competition and heavy metal concert where young people could also register to vote. Another event, “Saddle up for Change,” was a six-stop horseback ride across the reservation, with people visiting rural communities to register voters and update their registration status. The events were a hit, and Arizona Native Vote was there for the latter.

Advertisement

“We’re the ground team,” said Jaynie Parrish, executive director of Arizona Native Vote. “We know the voters. We know what needs to be done. We know precincts on tribal lands.”

Parrish launched her nonprofit in early 2023 after years of mobilizing Indigenous voters in the state via the Democratic Party. She and her team have been parsing through precinct data to single out registered voters who didn’t vote in 2020 or 2022 and target them for engagement. They target new voters, like high school and college students, and so-called “voting influencers,” people who regularly vote and can influence their family members to do the same.

“2022 was good,” Parrish said of her voter contact efforts that year. “Our two counties were the only ones in the whole state that saw an increase in voter turnout. Apache and Navajo County. It’s because we do this work year-round.”

“It was a slight increase,” she added, “but still an increase.”

A car passes by near Window Rock, Arizona, on Oct. 12, 2024. Sharon Chischilly for HuffPost

The walk itself carried cultural significance beyond the current electoral cycle. Young tied it to the 100-year anniversary of the signing of the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to Native Americans. (The irony of being granted rights on their own land was not lost on Young or on anyone who knows what irony means, folks.)

Advertisement

The trek was also inspired by the Navajo Long Walk of 1864, when the U.S. government forced Navajo people from their homelands and made them walk more than 400 miles from Fort Defiance — the location of Saturday’s event — to Bosque Redondo, New Mexico. Thousands of Navajos died during that walk, which was the goal of the U.S. government.

Young wanted to connect her event to that dark era to celebrate how far the Navajo people have come. In a nod to that effort, several people dressed in traditional Indigenous clothing for Saturday’s walk.

One young Navajo woman wearing deer hide wrap moccasins, which have thin soles and aren’t exactly built for long walks on pavement, had to pause because her shoe was unraveling. “It hurts a lot,” she told HuffPost, standing on the side of the road as friends were helping to wrap her shoe back up. Nonetheless, she said she wanted to finish the walk in them.

“We’ve survived genocide, you know?” Young said later. “So today’s event was a powerful demonstration of our survival.”

Despite the route being only 3 miles, the walk was an all-day affair. Before heading out, people gathered in a school parking lot in the intense Arizona sun as Fleetwood Mac’s “Rumours” blasted on a speaker and organizers handed out voter guides and T-shirts. There was an Apache ceremonial dance, with the smells of burning sage wafting through the air. And later, when the walk ended, Young hosted an hours-long pizza party at the nearby Navajo Nation Museum where people could get photos with Ruffalo and other actors taking part in the day’s events, Wilmer Valderrama and Cara Jade Myers.

Advertisement

At the finish line, on the dirt road outside of Fort Defiance Road Yard, Parrish had a table set up with a stack of voter guides and T-shirts featuring a character from the FX show “Reservation Dogs.” The shirts referenced a phrase often used in the show, “Don’t be a shit ass. Vote.”

Native Americans have long faced barriers to voting. People on reservations don’t always have traditional mailing addresses, so the U.S. Postal Service won’t mail them ballots. Some voter ID requirements, like the need to have a state-issued ID versus a tribal ID, have made it more difficult for voters on remote reservations. Poor infrastructure, like the kind that exists in parts of Navajo Nation, can mean unusable roads and nonexistent internet service for election after election.

They hit another obstacle on this walk: a locked gate outside of the polling station.

The facility at Fort Defiance Road Yard was usually only open from Monday through Thursday. But the front gate was supposed to have been unlocked for the event, with a ballot box accessible outside the building for dropping off votes. Young had confirmed with Apache County officials in advance that the gate would be open for people to walk in and actually cast ballots.

Standing in front of the chained-up gate, Young told the crowd that a county official had texted her during the walk to say there weren’t any staff available on a Saturday afternoon to drive out to the site and unlock the gate. She urged attendees to instead drop off their ballots at a post office near the museum they were headed to.

“We’re standing in front of a locked fence because on the Navajo Nation, our early polling sites have limited hours,” Young said. “I am disappointed that the gate is closed and we’re locked out. But thank you to those who brought your ballots.”

Advertisement

“They are trying to make it hard to vote,” Ruffalo later declared onstage at the pizza party, to applause. “The idea is to make you feel cynical about voting. It’s the bad guys who are making you feel cynical about voting because voting is power.”

“We saw what happened in the last election,” he added, referring to high Indigenous voter turnout. “We now have a Native American woman sitting in the Cabinet of the United States president.”

A little boy wearing a Hulk mask waits for a chance to meet actor Mark Ruffalo, who plays the Incredible Hulk in the latest Marvel movies, ahead of the Walk to the Polls event. Ruffalo later signed his mask. Sharon Chischilly for HuffPost

Miles down the road in Window Rock, some Navajo locals didn’t know anything about this walk. But they had strong feelings about voting in this presidential election.

“Don’t get me started about politics,” laughed Marjorie Francisco, 62, as she sipped her coffee in the lobby of the modest Quality Inn Navajo Nation Capital.

Advertisement

The hotel restaurant, called Diné Restaurant — Diné is a term Navajo people use to refer to themselves — was a local hot spot. People steadily streamed in from miles away, not to stay at the hotel but to come in for a hot meal of mutton stew and fry bread, and for some conversation.

Francisco, who has lived on the reservation for her entire life, said she plans to vote for Harris in large part because she’s a woman of color.

“She is a minority just like me,” she said. “It feels exciting because a lot of us minorities, we’re left behind. We’re on the back burners.”

Francisco said she doesn’t like the way Trump presents himself and that he hasn’t offered any plans for helping people who aren’t rich. “Us lower class, I consider myself as lower class,” she said. “I make less than $50,000 a year. It’s like, what are you [Trump] going to do for us?”

Francisco lives in a trailer in the town of Ganado with her husband, Ed. She said they just got water and electricity in their home two years ago, which was a big improvement over their previous way of life: driving an hour and a half to the town of Holbrook just to take a shower.

Advertisement

They shared stories of sleeping in their car in a Burger King parking lot for several nights when the miles-long dirt road to their home was buried in feet of snow. They talked about their community’s struggles with drugs and alcohol. Francisco works in a local hospital and said she’s seen young people coming in so strung out on meth or fentanyl that doctors had to tie them down and put them to sleep, just to calm them down.

Ed, who only gave his first name, said his local postal office had to remove its hand sanitizers because people were stealing them to drink them and try to get drunk from the rubbing alcohol in them. Both said they were glad to hear about the Protect the Sacred event down the road.

“It seems like nobody just, kind of, usually cares about the youth,” said Ed, before suggesting Harris is an exception. “I think that’s where Kamala comes in. She’s energetic. She does her moves. One of the ads where she was dancing, I was like, oh! She’s got some moves!”

Ed said he worries about the fate of his community if Trump wins, in part because of his ties to Project 2025. Among other things, the Heritage Foundation’s far-right 900-page presidential transition guidebook would take a wrecking ball to public lands.

“Our nation is at stake. Our homeland is at stake,” he warned. “If Trump gets back in there, we’re going to lose it.”

Advertisement

Ed said he doesn’t talk about it much, but that he and other elders in his community believe that Trump was prophesied in Navajo culture as someone who was going to return from another world to “take us all back, to have us lose everything.” In another Navajo prophecy, he said, a woman of color emerges as a leader who helps the tribe.

“I see that now,” he said. “I have a real strong cultural background with traditional knowledge. My grampy, he did these things, he said, ‘I’m not going to see it, but I think you will.’”

Ed didn’t give many details on this Navajo prophecy. He lowered his voice when he spoke of it, and said it’s not something he tells his friends that he sees happening.

“We don’t discuss this,” he said. Asked why he shared this story with HuffPost, Ed said simply, “You asked me about it.”

“You’re here talking about it. You come from Washington,” he added. “That’s just the kind of knowledge that we have.”

Advertisement

Rosalind Zah, wife of former Navajo Nation President Peterson Zah, wears her "Vote Kamala" visor hat Saturday evening in Window Rock, Arizona. Sharon Chischilly for HuffPost

With early voting now underway in Arizona, Parrish and her team are making their final push to ensure tribal residents turn out to vote. She’s got 20 paid staffers on the ground working with five tribes in the state: Navajo, Hopi, White Mountain Apache, Tohono Oʼodham and San Carlos Apache.

She said her goal is to hit a 2% increase in Indigenous voter turnout over 2020. As part of her efforts to reach young voters, Parrish and her team have gone into 10 high schools in the last semester to talk directly to students, mostly seniors, about civics and voting. Arizona Native Vote will keep engaging with those students well beyond November.

“What we’re doing there is establishing that relationship. We are not a one-and-done group,” she said. Ultimately, she said, her goal is to grow Arizona Native Vote into a robust statewide operation like Fair Fight, the voting rights nonprofit led by Georgia politician and voting rights activist Stacey Abrams.

“I want Fair Fight, but I want to do it here in Arizona with tribes,” Parrish said, “because there’s no excuse why we can’t have that.”

Advertisement

Back at the Quality Inn, Francisco conceded that for all the years she’s been voting, she still feels disillusioned with the system. She said she feels like the Electoral College erases votes like hers, and brought up former Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton losing the election in 2016 despite winning the popular vote.

But maybe for the first time, Francisco said she felt like her vote in 2020 really did matter.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WASHINGTON (AP) — In battleground Pennsylvania, Kamala Harris warned that democracy and reproductive rights were at stake as she campaigned alongside a former Republican congresswoman.

Going to the same state the day before, Donald Trump served French fries at a closed McDonald’s.

As the 2024 presidential contest speeds to its conclusion on Nov. 5, Harris and Trump are embracing wildly different strategies to energize the coalitions they need to win. Both are making bets that will prove prescient or ill-advised.

Advertisement

Trump’s team has largely abandoned traditional efforts to broaden his message to target moderate voters, focusing instead on energizing his base of fiery partisans and turning out low-propensity voters — especially young men of all races — with tough talk and events aimed at getting attention online.

Harris is leaning into a more traditional all-of-the-above playbook targeting the narrow slice of undecided voters that remain, especially moderates, college-educated suburbanites, and women of all races and education. More than Trump, she is going after Republican women who may have supported rival Nikki Haley in this year’s GOP primary and are dissatisfied with the former president.

“It’s all pieces of a very complex puzzle,” Harris senior campaign adviser David Plouffe said this week. “This would all be a simpler exercise if you can focus just on one voter cohort. You can’t. And you got to make sure you know you’re doing well enough with all of them so that when you put all that together it adds up to 50%.”

Trump’s team sees it as a much simpler equation.

His aides insist that efforts to maximize turnout from Trump’s hardcore base do not mean he’s ignoring swing voters, even if he’s not tailoring a different message to reach them.

Advertisement

“I just think that there’s a misunderstanding on what’s motivating those people,” Trump political director James Blair said. “I mean, the fact is the economy’s motivating those people. Those people overwhelmingly think that they’re worse off than they were four years ago ... So then the question becomes: Who’s better equipped to fix it?”

The divergent strategies underscore the stark differences between the candidates themselves, in personality and policy.

Harris, a former California senator who would be the first female president, has promised to include a Republican in her Cabinet, while prioritizing efforts to protect democracy, reproductive rights and the middle class. Trump, a former president, has vowed to fight for the working class as well. He also has promised a campaign of retribution against his political enemies with an administration packed with loyalists.

One point on which both camps agree: The election will be decided by voters in just seven swing states, a political map that has not shifted significantly or narrowed as Election Day speeds into view. They are Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Arizona, Georgia, Nevada and North Carolina.

One Harris adviser, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss internal strategy, described the situation as “still terrifyingly close in all seven.”

Advertisement

Trump rejects the traditional pivot to the middle

Trump is speaking largely to his loyal Republican base at the expense of moderate voters, especially suburban women. He peppers his rallies with profanity, personal insults against Harris and ominous talk of “enemies within.”

He has said repeatedly over the last week that Democrats like former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., represent a more serious threat to the United States than China and Russia do.

Trump has also rejected recent opportunities to speak to more traditional audiences, turning down an interview with CBS’ popular “60 Minutes” and refusing to debate Harris for a second time unless it was moderated by Fox News, home to several of his favorite conservative hosts.

Instead, his campaign is scheduling appearances on podcasts and online shows geared towards young men — especially working-class Hispanic and Black men, who typically vote less frequently and tend to favor Democrats.

He’s attended sporting events including mixed-martial arts fights and football games, putting him in front of audiences who don’t typically engage with traditional media outlets.

Advertisement

Josh Rouse, a 28-year-old Black man and registered Republican, said he’s only recently been drawn to politics. He didn’t vote in 2016, but voted for Trump in 2020.

“If anything, I think it’s important to remember we’re all people, regardless of whether you’re white or Black,” said Rouse, who works in roofing and attended Trump’s rally in Greenville, North Carolina, this week. “It doesn’t matter who you are. He speaks to all of us.”

Trump’s team has also created viral moments in non-political settings like his trip to McDonald’s on Sunday, part of an extended campaign to cast doubt on Harris’ work history at the fast-food franchise. Trump also went to Coachella, California, and will host a rally at Madison Square Garden in New York City on Sunday — both in heavily Democratic states but where the related media attention and online content would surely reach swing-state voters.

Trump has kept an aggressive schedule. He is set to visit every battleground state this week save Wisconsin.

Harris makes Republicans part of her persuasion playbook

Backed by an avalanche of campaign cash, Harris is holding in-person events but also launching a sprawling door-knocking operation, hyper-targeted online ads and a carefully designed media strategy to reach specific voting blocs.

Advertisement

Harris’ team believes that roughly 10% of voters in the battleground states are still persuadable, either because they are truly undecided or because their support for Trump is soft. The campaign vows to keep trying to persuade such voters until the final minutes of in-person voting.

Her team sees the possibility of significant growth among Republican, college-educated, suburban women alienated by Trump’s extreme rhetoric. Even small shifts in swing states could have massive electoral implications.

The Harris campaign quickly produced digital ads last week highlighting Trump’s description of the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection as “a day of love.” And Harris spent most of Monday campaigning in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin alongside Liz Cheney, a Republican House leader during Trump’s presidency who swung sharply against him after Jan. 6.

Harris is scheduled to visit Houston for an event Friday with women who have been affected by the state’s ban on all abortions, which took effect after the Supreme Court, including three justices nominated by Trump, overturned Roe v. Wade in 2022. She’ll be going there after spending time in Georgia, which banned abortions after six weeks of pregnancy.

Nicolette Milholin, 45, of Mont Clare, Pennsylvania, said she considered herself a political independent until Trump was elected in 2016.

Advertisement

“To me, democracy is at stake,” Milholin said at a Harris event this week in Chester County, Pennsylvania. “We have a party that was built for a family and a dynasty. And then we have a party here represented by Kamala Harris, that was built for our country.”

___
CNN —

As some key battleground states celebrated record early voter turnout last week, a rash of misinformation began to spread through new digital tools launched by election conspiracy theorists.

In one case, a self-described relief worker in hurricane-battered North Carolina posted a dire warning on VoteAlert.org: Federal Emergency Management Agency employees responding to the storm damage were actually there as part of a “ballot stuffing” scheme intended to swing the election. The post alleged FEMA would use stockpiles of donations “as a cover to bring absentee ballots” in with tractor trailers.

The claim – which was readily dismissed by local authorities – is just one example of a new crop of falsehoods that have begun to proliferate on apps and webpages unveiled by various right-wing groups.

Their intention for the apps is to give citizens a way to document suspected wrongdoing in November’s election. But on one of the platforms where complaints are publicly viewable, many of the allegations are rife with misunderstandings of election processes or lack proof for their claims, according to officials who reviewed them at CNN’s request.

Some of the groups behind these new apps and websites have a history of pushing elaborate theories of election fraud. One has sued close to a dozen states to make it harder to certify elections, and counts among its attorneys one of the lawyers who defended Donald Trump in his second impeachment trial for trying to overturn the 2020 election.

One social media app is founded by MyPillow CEO Mike Lindell. Another is a tipline run by a group that has been repeatedly promoted by Steve Bannon’s “War Room” show. One of the platforms is an app that displays user-submitted claims of election improprieties across a map of the US, whose founder has said that the 2020 election prompted his group to “kick things into high-gear with development.”

America PAC, the pro-Trump super PAC funded by Elon Musk, launched an “Election Integrity Community” page on Musk’s platform X this week, encouraging users to “share potential incidents of voter fraud or irregularities you see while voting in the 2024 election.”

Election watchdogs fear this digital infrastructure could enable groups to collect, spread and potentially weaponize false information faster and more strategically than they did in 2020. Moreover, they say such tools could further embolden activists to act in a way that diverts local resources or even interferes with voting at polling sites.

“These apps, these websites are part of a broader trend of trying to undermine public trust, trying to cause chaos and ultimately trying to lay the groundwork to potentially question or try to overturn election results,” said Joanna Lydgate, the president and CEO of States United Democracy Center, a Washington, DC, based group founded to advance fair elections.

Armies of amateur election police, primed with years of false ideas about voting insecurities, now stand ready to file complaints in central repositories, which could become fodder for post-election lawsuits.

“What we witnessed in 2020 was more of an ad hoc approach to undermining elections,” Lydgate added. “The anti-democracy movement has become more sophisticated in the years since.”

‘Suspicious’ activity

One of the more prominent projects comes from the conservative Texas-based nonprofit True the Vote, which in September called on supporters to “join the frontline of election protection” by using a new app. Known as VoteAlert, the app enables users to report “suspicious” activity and review other allegations on a feed that resembles those of other popular social media platforms.

Video Ad Feedback 'I was pretty pissed off': Man finds his voter registration is challenged by nonprofit 05:29 - Source: CNN

Already, the app displays dozens of crowdsourced allegations of election improprieties in precincts across the country, which have prompted hundreds of likes and comments between users.

A VoteAlert user suggested earlier this month, for example, that “ballot stealing” from mailboxes occurred in Jefferson County, Colorado, based on a Ring camera video that shows a man on a neighborhood street looking in a mailbox at around 2 a.m.

Amanda Gonzalez, Jefferson County clerk, stated that although county officials are aware of this incident, they are not aware of evidence of any ballot theft. She added that a hypothetically stolen ballot would not count if it were cast because the signature would not match the signature of the voter on file.

Another VoteAlert account posted that people in Haines, Alaska, had registered to vote and cast ballots in past elections using the address of a post office as their home address, which the user called a “common fraudulent registration practice.” An operations manager with Alaska’s elections division, Michaela Thompson, called the post inaccurate and said no registered voters have that address listed as their residence.

In Henrico County, Virginia, a VoteAlert user complained of “electioneering” after their husband voted at a courthouse and saw “a very large Kamala Harris tent right by the door.” Anne Marie Middlesworth, the county’s deputy registrar, told CNN that the tent was more than the required 40 feet from the doors of the polling place and that Republicans have also setup a tent at the location.

‘Cut out the middleman’

True the Vote’s founder Catherine Engelbrecht, who has amplified various election conspiracy theories and helped organize mass challenges to voter registrations across the US earlier this year, has argued her group seeks to empower citizens to ensure fair elections. Engelbrecht did not respond to a request for comment.

But local officials say that rather than posting on apps, concerned voters should go straight to authorities.

“Cut out the middleman and report it straight to our office so that we can investigate it,” said Frank Phillips, the election administrator for Denton County, Texas.

Phillips was the focus of a VoteAlert post that suggested he said that poll workers must allow people with “non citizen” IDs to vote. Phillips said the post misconstrued a prior policy he had articulated related to limited-term driver’s licenses, and he added that Texas has a verification process to ensure noncitizens are not registered to vote. “I never said illegals could vote,” he said.

The state issued an advisory earlier this month clarifying that Texans should not use limited-term driver’s licenses to vote.

The dubious nature of claims on such platforms may not stop them from being leveraged by groups in post-election lawsuits or for political strategies, said Alice Clapman, senior counsel with the Brennan Center for Justice’s Voting Rights Program.

“Election deniers are using technology to generate details that are not actually evidence, but that could look like evidence potentially to the courts, to the public,” Clapman said. “I think the strategy is to just generate such high volumes of misinformation that it’s harder for journalists, for courts, for the public to parse through all of that.”

Despite the fact that about 60 lawsuits filed by Trump’s lawyers and allies that challenged aspects of the 2020 race were dropped or dismissed, Trump has insisted he won that election.

‘Forensic heavy lifting’

Last month, in an appearance on Bannon’s “War Room” program, activist Marly Hornik introduced her organization’s new tool to report any suspicious activity at the polls.

Hornik, co-founder of the Missouri-based United Sovereign Americans, steered listeners to a new “election complaint” webpage on the group’s site, where people could submit purported violations they witnessed to authorities.

In just a few clicks, Hornik explained, users could file reports and receive back copies that they would need to send to their state election officials – providing a trail of “evidence” that could be used in future litigation. The webpage also allows users to upload videos, photographs and relevant documents, she said.

Guest host Ben Harnwell, one of a regular cast of fill-ins since Bannon went to federal prison in July to serve a four-month sentence on a contempt of Congress conviction, called the plan “genius.”

“We have to do this if we really love this country,” said Hornik. “If we really want to win, we have to do this forensic heavy lifting.”

The bare-bones webpage would not appear out of place on a local government website, if not for the Uncle Sam icon and the phrase, “We need you!” at the start of an instructional video. The form provides users with multiple options to list what they claim to have seen at their polling place, ranging from potentially serious issues like a site closing without notice to more benign concerns like long lines.

The video’s narrator states clearly that any complaints will become part of the public record and may be used in any future legal action.

“They’re actually more blatant than some of the other groups about how they are collecting these incidents in an attempt to file post-election litigation, to block certification or dispute the results,” said Emma Steiner, a researcher at the progressive watchdog group Documented who has tracked the rise of self-identified election integrity groups, like United Sovereign Americans, since the 2020 election.

‘Palpably baseless legal claims’

United Sovereign Americans has already been aggressive in its legal strategy this election season. The group has filed lawsuits in nine states to prevent the certification of elections until authorities comply with various demands, such as the overhaul of state voter rolls, which it argues are plagued with errors. Among the group’s attorneys is Bruce Castor, who in 2021 represented former President Trump in his second impeachment trial before the US Senate.

Authorities in some states have balked at some of the suits’ arguments. Ohio’s Republican attorney general, for example, argued one of the pending suits seeks to “halt the 2024 election” based on “palpably baseless legal claims.”

In a statement to CNN, a spokesperson for United Sovereign Americans said the organization simply acts as “a conduit to assist citizens in following a legally valid process,” and that the group hopes people also send their complaints to officials responsible for investigating. The spokesperson added that the group may file more lawsuits.

On its website, United Sovereign Americans says it depends on donations to fund its legal strategy. The group reported just under $14,000 in cash on hand at the end of 2023, according to filings. A recent fundraising campaign on the group’s site aimed to gather 100,000 small dollar donors.

Regardless of the merits of the claims from such groups, voting experts say the strategy of using misinformation for political gain in this election has already begun.

“It’s not a matter of speculation about whether people will be sowing doubts,” said Clapman of the Brennan Center. “They are already sowing them, so it is an all-hands-on-deck effort to put out accurate information … and ensure we have a peaceful transfer of power.”

CNN’s Tierney Sneed contributed to this report
CNN —

Vice President Kamala Harris on Wednesday night will deliver a final pitch to voters, less than two weeks out from the election and with early voting already underway, at a CNN town hall in Chester Township, Pennsylvania.

The event, which will start at 9 p.m. ET, comes on the date CNN proposed a second debate between Harris and former President Donald Trump, which Harris accepted but Trump turned down.

Harris, in the closing stretch of the race, has ratcheted up her attacks on Trump’s basic mental competence, increasingly describing the former president as incoherent and “unfit to be president of the United States.” She has also zeroed in more sharply on his role in the gutting of federal abortion rights, calling his often-callous discussion of the issue a mark of “cruelty.”

Trump, in turn, has continued to swing wildly at Harris and, over the past few weeks, seen fit to question – and sometimes assail – Jewish, Black and Latino voters who are supporting the Democrat.

But for all the rhetoric, organizing and hundreds of millions of dollars spent on campaign ads, the race is looking like a coin-toss – as both campaigns show signs of frustration with the relative stability of national and battleground state polling.

Here are five things to watch for during Harris’ town hall, moderated by CNN’s Anderson Cooper:

Trump talk

Harris’ campaign has over the past few weeks increasingly questioned whether Trump is mentally and physically fit for another four years in the White House.

“He’s becoming increasingly unstable and unhinged, and it requires that response,” Harris told reporters last weekend in Detroit. “I think the American people deserve better than someone who actually seems to be unstable.”

It is many ways a reversal of the strategy Trump and allied Republicans used for years to pillory President Joe Biden, before the 81-year-old incumbent dropped out of the 2024 race in July. Harris, who just turned 60, has kept up a frenetic campaign schedule and derided Trump for dropping out of scheduled interviews – with one report citing “exhaustion” as the cause. She has also appeared more willing to reference bizarre behavior, like when the 78-year-old Republican stopped a recent town hall to sway and dance for 39 minutes in front of a confused-looking Kristi Noem, the South Dakota governor meant to be moderating the event.

At the same time, surveys of undecided voters continue to signal that they want to know more about Harris and her policy plans. She has already pitched one of the most ambitious expansions of senior care in modern US history, though it rarely gets a thorough hearing.

Harris does not necessarily need to choose between pitching herself and deriding Trump, but town hall questions often give candidates the leeway to steer the conversation. Where she goes will provide new insight into how she and her campaign view the race.

The delicate Biden issue

Harris has treaded carefully around the topic of Biden, delicately balancing loyalty to the president she serves under with the political reality that Democrats pushed him out of the race.

Trump’s campaign pounced when, earlier this month on ABC’s “The View,” Harris was asked what she would have done differently than Biden and responded, “There is not a thing that comes to mind.”

A week ago, in an interview with Fox News where she was asked a similar question, Harris took advantage of the do-over and sought to show some distance from Biden by highlighting their differences in age (she is 60; he is 81) and political background (her resume was built in California; he spent 36 years in the Senate). She has also said she’d have a Republican in her Cabinet.

“My presidency will not be a continuation of Joe Biden’s presidency,” Harris told Fox News.

The economy poses perhaps the biggest challenge for Harris. Biden has been eager to tout his economic record, arguing that United States’ rebound from the coronavirus pandemic is a success story. But Harris must face the reality that many Americans continue to feel the pressure of inflation — something she’s sought to meet with policy proposals aimed at combatting price gouging, helping first-time home buyers and more.

Though polls showed Americans had deep concerns over Biden’s age, he can make one unique claim: He’s the only person who has ever defeated Trump. Harris is seeking to reassemble Biden’s 2020 coalition, which included strong support from Black voters and gains among suburban moderates. Needing those voters’ support could answer why she hasn’t put even more daylight between herself and Biden.

Confronting Trump’s attacks

Trump has unleashed a barrage of at times profane attacks on his Democratic rival and her allies in the race’s final stretch.

He said Harris has been a “sh*t” vice president. He called former Wyoming Republican Rep. Liz Cheney, who has campaigned with Harris, “dumb as a rock.”

Will Harris respond directly to those attacks, or will she brush them off?

The vice president has increasingly cited Trump’s own words on the campaign trail — sometimes even playing clips of Trump’s incendiary remarks, verbal stumbles and bizarre moments at her own rallies. She’s used those moments to cast Trump as unhinged.

Focus on abortion rights

Abortion rights has been perhaps the best issue for Democrats since the Supreme Court — with a majority consisting of three conservatives appointed by Trump — overturned Roe v. Wade in 2022.

It’s one Harris will emphasize in the race’s closing weeks, particularly with polls showing a historic gender gap, with a clear majority of women supporting the Democratic nominee and men backing Trump.

Harris could look for ways to emphasize her support for abortion rights while pointing out the practical issues caused by Trump’s call for states to decide their own policies. She has done so on the campaign trail in recent days, highlighting individual cases of women who were affected by states’ restrictive abortion laws.

On Saturday in Georgia, she cited the case of Amber Thurman, a Georgia woman who died after her medical care was delayed because of the state’s abortion laws.

Last month, a report by nonprofit news outlet ProPublica revealed Thurman died in 2022 from a treatable infection due to delays to her medical care stemming from the state’s restrictive abortion law. Thurman tried to schedule a surgical abortion four hours away in North Carolina, but due to traffic, she was late to the appointment. Instead, she had a medication abortion – two pills approved to end a pregnancy through 10 weeks’ gestation – but developed rare, ultimately fatal complications.

“Donald Trump still refuses to take accountability — to take any accountability for the pain and the suffering he has caused, or even to just acknowledge the pain and suffering that has actually happened,” Harris said.

Courting on-the-fence Republicans

On Monday alone, Harris was joined at three events in three different states – across the “blue wall” of Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin – by former Rep. Liz Cheney, a hardline conservative who, as she’s said repeatedly, has never voted for a Democratic presidential nominee but is backing the vice president, because of what she describes as the existential stakes of the coming election.

Harris has not backed off her own liberal inclinations, but she has sent a consistent message to Republican voters vexed by Trump, but unsure about breaking from the tribe, that she wants to be “a president for all Americans.” Harris is hardly the first candidate to use that line, or some version of it. But in sitting beside Cheney – the daughter of Iraq War architect and former Vice President Dick Cheney, who is also voting for Harris – the vice president is betting that there is a meaningful cohort of Republicans and GOP-leaning independents who can be convinced to abandon Trump.

This is big-tent, coalition politics at its purest, the kind that is frequently found in European parliamentary elections, but rarely seen on the US presidential trail. If Harris fails, her campaign will be lambasted for wasting precious time and resources. If she wins, it could signal a potentially historic reordering of American politics.

First, though, she has to deliver a closing argument to meet the moment.
Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump. Getty Images

Vice President Kamala Harris faces the latest high-profile moment in her condensed candidacy as she heads Wednesday to the biggest battleground prize on the 2024 map – Pennsylvania – to field questions from one of the most coveted groups in the election – undecided and persuadable voters.

Meanwhile, former President Donald Trump is set to return to the trail with a pair of events in Georgia – a faith town hall in Zebulon and a rally in Duluth hosted by Turning Point Action – as he seeks to flip the state and its 16 electoral votes back to his column in November.

Town hall test: The CNN town hall in Delaware County outside Philadelphia comes at a critical point in the presidential race with 13 days until Election Day, more than 20 million votes already cast and Harris locked in an exceedingly close race with her Republican rival. The event falls on the same night as a proposed CNN debate between the two candidates that Harris accepted but Trump turned down.

In the closing days of the campaign the vice president has sharpened her attacks against the GOP nominee by questioning his fitness for office, while also warning about the serious policy consequences of a second Trump term, with an emphasis on the issue of reproductive rights.

For Harris, Wednesday marks her 95th day as a presidential candidate – a reminder of the reduced timeline she has had to introduce herself to voters. Her aim Wednesday will be to continue working to give voters a better understanding of who she is personally and where she stands politically, while at the same time reminding movable voters about the reasons they remain resistant to the former president.

Sounding the alarm: The vice president is not alone in sounding the alarm about the potential danger of a second Trump presidency. Some of the loudest warnings are coming from those who worked in his administration, including John Kelly, who served as Trump’s White House chief of staff and Secretary of Homeland Security.

While Kelly had previously voiced concern about the former president, the decision to weigh in so forcefully in the final weeks of the election represented a stunning development. In an interview with the New York Times, Kelly said Trump “certainly falls into the general definition of fascist.”

The retired Marine general also recounted to The Atlantic an exchange where Kelly says Trump told him he wished US military personnel gave him the same deference that Adolf Hitler’s generals showed the Nazi dictator during World War II. A Trump campaign adviser denied Kelly’s claim, calling it “absolutely false.”

The Harris campaign quickly seized on the comments, with vice presidential nominee Tim Walz telling a crowd at a rally in Wisconsin that the episode proves Trump “is descending into madness.”

Focus on rhetoric: But it’s not just Trump’s reported comments from years ago that are drawing scrutiny in the final days of the election as the former president increasingly leans on inflammatory claims in media appearances and campaign events.

During an event Tuesday in Florida aimed at appealing to Latino voters, Trump attacked his Democratic rival with a racist trope, calling the vice president “lazy as hell” as he criticized her for not holding any public campaign events. Harris participated in a pair of television interviews Tuesday, a day after holding separate campaign events in each of the Blue Wall states.

The former president also told those gathered at his Doral golf resort that presidents “have extreme power” to be able to address immigration.
In July 2023, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis raised a few eyebrows with an unexpected personnel announcement. The then-Republican presidential candidate said that if he were elevated to the White House, he’d consider then-Democratic presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr. for a position in his administration — with either the Food and Drug Administration or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

That caused a stir for a variety of reasons, including the fact that Kennedy is an environmental lawyer with no professional background in medicine or public health. Complicating matters, Kennedy’s bizarre conspiracy theories and ridiculous ideas about health threats have left him derided as a proponent of “kook science.”

DeSantis ultimately backed off the idea of giving Kennedy a powerful administrative position, but 15 months later, a different Republican is still thinking along the same lines. The Wall Street Journal reported a few days ago on members of Donald Trump’s prospective Cabinet.

Trump did give some hints, referencing Robert F. Kennedy Jr., but stopping short of confirming concrete plans. He praised Kennedy, the nephew of former President John F. Kennedy who ran for president as an independent before dropping out to endorse Trump in August, for his work supporting women’s health and the environment. “He’s going to be a part of it,” Trump said.

Since making those comments on Fox News late last week, the Republican former president has emphasized RFK Jr.’s potential role on his team several times.

On Monday, for example, Trump appeared in New York and fielded a question from a voter who was concerned about banning artificial foods in urban communities.

“So, Bobby Kennedy, right?” the GOP nominee responded. “Everybody likes Bobby, and he’s so big into the health food and women things, everything.”

As eloquent as those comments were, Trump added a day later, at a campaign rally in North Carolina: “Make America healthy again. Come on, Bobby. Bobby’s gonna do it. Bobby. Let’s go, Bobby. You gonna make us healthy, Bobby?”

He’s obviously one of the great orators of our time.

All joking aside, the idea that Kennedy should be rewarded with a powerful position in a Republican administration, presumably to work on making Americans “healthy,” is more than a little bizarre.

As my MSNBC colleague Zeeshan Aleem recently explained, RFK Jr. “is best known for fringe conspiracy theories tied to vaccines and other medical interventions, such as the belief that antidepressants cause school shootings.”

NPR had a related report last year, noting, “Wi-Fi causes cancer and ‘leaky brain,’ Kennedy told podcaster Joe Rogan last month. Antidepressants are to blame for school shootings, he mused during an appearance with Twitter CEO Elon Musk. Chemicals in the water supply could turn children transgender, he told right-wing Canadian psychologist and podcaster Jordan Peterson, echoing a false assertion made by serial fabulist Alex Jones. AIDS may not be caused by HIV, he has suggested multiple times.”

To be sure, this is just scratching the surface.

Not to put too fine a point on this, but if his name were Robert F. Smith, there’s obviously no way he’d be considered for a position of authority in the federal government. He’d be dismissed by the American mainstream as a fringe figure, better left ignored by serious people.

But in 2024, the Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office is nevertheless letting the public know — indeed, he’s boasting to voters — that this fringe figure with ridiculous ideas is “going to be a part” of his team in a second term.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

ZEBULON, Ga. — While Donald Trump’s reported praise for Adolf Hitler may alarm some Americans, to his followers and Republican allies, it’s just another day that ends in “y” — yet another example of his political opponents attacking him unfairly.

“That’s ridiculous. They make up lies,” said Vicki Casto, a retiree from Flovilla, Georgia, as she waited to hear the former president speak at a town hall focused on faith about an hour south of Atlanta. “Anything they’re saying kind of turns around to be what they’re doing.”

Advertisement

“I don’t believe that’s true,” added Linda Ailstock, a retired nurse from Ellerslie, Georgia. “He’s a mean person, but I don’t think that he would do that. I don’t think he would do the things that Democrats are doing.”

Retired Marine Corps Gen. John Kelly, Trump’s longest-serving chief of staff, said this week that his former boss meets the definition of a fascist, recalling that Trump praised Hitler and asked why his generals couldn’t be more like the Nazi generals who had served the dictator.

Mark Milley, the former Army general and Trump’s handpicked chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also warned that Trump is “fascist to the core.”

Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump’s Democratic opponent in next month’s election, has spoken of Trump’s autocratic behavior and language since she moved to the top of the ticket in July following President Joe Biden’s decision to end his reelection campaign. On Wednesday, she cited Kelly’s words as additional evidence.

Advertisement

“It is deeply troubling and incredibly dangerous that Donald Trump would invoke Adolf Hitler, the man who is responsible for the deaths of 6 million Jews and hundreds of thousands of Americans,” she said in brief remarks to reporters.

Vice President Kamala Harris speaks on former White House chief of staff John Kelly's recent comments about former U.S. President Donald Trump, including that he fits “into the general definition of fascist” and wanted the “kind of generals Hitler had.” Kevin Dietsch via Getty Images

But at Fox News, the pro-Trump network that generally avoids negative stories about the former president, morning host Brian Kilmeade defended Trump just as his rallygoers had. He argued that Trump, coming from a background of being the absolute authority while running his own business, was likely frustrated with appointees who did not do exactly what he wanted.

“I can absolutely see him go: Now, it’d be great to have German generals that actually do what we ask them to do,” Kilmeade said Wednesday morning, just hours after Kelly’s comments about his former boss’ autocratic tendencies were published in separate accounts in The Atlantic and The New York Times. “Maybe not fully being cognizant of the third rail of German generals who were Nazis or whatever.”

Republican elected officials, who over nine years have honed a defense of Trump as someone whose alarming pronouncements should not be taken literally, largely fell back on that approach again.

Advertisement

Even New Hampshire Gov. Chris Sununu, who during the Republican primary was eager to attack Trump as he supported rival Nikki Haley for the nomination, said that while he respected Kelly, the general’s statements and warning about Trump would not keep him from supporting the GOP nominee and ultimately would not matter to voters, either.

“You’re going to get salacious things said and all that,” Sununu told CNN. “We’ve heard a lot of extreme things about Donald Trump, from Donald Trump. It’s kind of par for the course. It’s really, unfortunately, with a guy like that, it’s kind of baked into the vote, at this point.”

Former Wyoming Rep. Liz Cheney, who broke with her Republican Party after Trump’s Jan. 6, 2021, coup attempt and is now supporting Harris, tried to shame her former colleagues. “If your response to Gen John Kelly, gold star father and Trump’s WH chief of staff, confirming that Trump praised Hitler and called members of our military ‘suckers and losers’ is to defend Trump, you need to look in the mirror and realize your dishonor will live forever,” she wrote in a social media post.

At Trump’s town hall on Tuesday, hosted inside one of the churches in the town of 1,500, attendees said they believed that he would prevail in November because God was on his side. But they downplayed the stark warnings from former Trump aides about the former president’s character and fitness for office.

“It’s always funny how someone who fights for freedom of speech gets called a fascist,” Daniel Padron, an engineer from nearby Fayetteville, told HuffPost. “Like, you call someone who’s doing the opposite of fascism, a fascist?”

Advertisement

“[We are] people who are trying to look for more freedoms instead of more rules and regulations and laws, like I mean, being in Georgia, one of our biggest things here is: Leave us alone,” he added. “Let us live our life. We don’t need government to ruin that for us.”

Karla Harrington, a Peachtree City resident who is originally from El Salvador, said that people have made up their minds about Trump and that warnings about his character would not work, even from those who worked for him in his administration.

“You either love him or you hate him, and you don’t have to love someone to support the fact that they’re a good business owner, right?” she said.
What is the No. 1 leading cause of stress for you? Hint: It's not family

toggle caption LPETTET/Getty Images

Every year the American Psychological Association takes a look at the leading causes of stress in the U.S., and publishes an annual report. This year the report shows all the usual suspects like money, health and family are still wearing people down, but one issue is dominating – politics.

Seven out of 10 adults say the future of the nation is a significant source of stress in their lives and the issue crosses party lines: 80% of Republicans rated it a top stressor, so did 79% of Democrats and 73% of Independents. Lynn Bufka, a clinical psychologist and APA’s deputy chief, professional practice, says she was surprised by the findings.

Sponsor Message

“Republicans, Democrats are actually united in having concern about the future of the nation. And they’re not sure that the country’s system of checks and balances is actually working the way it should be working,” Bufka says. The majority is worried that the election results will lead to political violence.

The report – called Stress in America 2024: A Nation in Political Turmoil — details the results of a survey conducted by the Harris Poll on behalf of the APA. More than 3,000 U.S. adults aged 18 and older were surveyed between August 1st and 23rd, 2024.

Most adults (54%) say they have little to no trust in the U.S. government, and 41% say the state of the nation has made them consider moving to a different country. And another finding that's probably adding to the political divide — 46% of respondents say they wouldn’t date someone who didn’t share the same political opinions (47% of women said this, and 45% of men).

A majority of respondents are also concerned about misinformation and disinformation — 82% said they are worried that people are basing their values and opinions on false or inaccurate information.

Bufka says one of the problems is Americans are not seeing the things that matter to them represented in the political discourse. People want to feel safe in their communities, hold jobs that can support their families, and drive on roads without potholes and bridges that don’t collapse, she says.

Sponsor Message

“Oftentimes people are feeling concerned or stressed when they’re not seeing politicians working on the issues that really make a difference in their day to day lives,” Bufka says.

The same is true of the political conversations people see in the news and on social media platforms.

Tania Israel, professor of counseling psychology at UC Santa Barbara and author of the book Facing the Fracture, How to Navigate the Challenges of Living in a Divided Nation, says people can change this dynamic by putting down their phones and talking to each other, “really listening to where other people are coming from and encouraging them to share more with us rather than share less with us,” says Israel. “Because folks are more nuanced, more complex and less extreme than we imagine them to be.”

Israel also encourages people to become involved in civic life or politics outside of their social media feeds with activities like “working at the polls on election day, volunteering in your community, coaching soccer,” she says. “Anything that’s working toward a common goal with other people is really not only good for that cause, but also for our mental health.”

There is some positive news in the report. Three out of five people felt hopeful about the election results. Stress can also galvanize people into action; 80% of survey respondents say they do intend to vote in the Presidential election.

Bufka says even though there are known solutions to mitigating the perceived political divide – people are just out of practice with these behaviors.

“Either we’ve forgotten how to do that, we’re uncertain how to do that, or we have gotten ourselves sort of into our own bubbles in a way that we’re not sure how to get out of them,” she says.

She believes Americans want to find their way back to a place where they aren’t shouting past each other — they just don’t know how to get there.

Sponsor Message

If political disagreements are stressing you out, you can find tips and strategies to bridge the divide at NPR’s Stress Less: A quest to reclaim your calm.

This story was edited by Jane Greenhalgh
Trump and Harris' closing messages to Republicans are as different as they come

toggle caption Kamil Krzaczynski/AFP via Getty Images

GREENVILLE, N.C. — With just over two weeks to go until voting closes on Election Day, Vice President Harris and former President Donald Trump spent Monday campaigning in swing states focused on a voting bloc key to victory: Republicans.

In North Carolina, Trump touted early voting numbers while touring storm damage near Asheville, railed against Harris while promoting hardline immigration policies at a rally in Greenville and courted evangelical voters at a faith-focused event just outside of Charlotte.

"As I look back at my life's journey and events, I now recognize that it's been the hand of God leading me to where I am today," Trump said at an event with faith leaders in Concord. "And my faith took on new meaning on July 13th in Butler, Pennsylvania, where I was knocked to the ground essentially by what seemed like a supernatural hand. And I would like to think that God saved me for a purpose, and that's to make our country greater."

Sponsor Message

Meanwhile, Harris held several moderated town hall-style discussions with former GOP Congresswoman Liz Cheney in the suburbs of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, where the vice president framed the election as a choice on the future of democracy where the stakes rise above partisan labels.

"I have said before and it must be repeated each time: There are moments in the history of our country which challenge us, each of us, to really decide," Harris said in Malvern, Pa. "Do we stand for those things that we talk about, including in particular country over party?"

Throughout the 2024 presidential campaign, Trump has made little effort to moderate his message beyond his base within the Republican Party, and has instead sought to grow that base by turning out lower propensity voters receptive to his message and disillusioned by the current Democratic administration.

The coalition that powered President Biden's narrow 2020 victory included a sizable number of anti-Trump conservatives and right-leaning independents who backed his campaign but otherwise support Republicans. After taking over as the Democratic nominee this summer, Harris has ramped up efforts to campaign across the aisle and expand the party's tent to defeat Trump.

As polls continue to show a likely close race in the seven swing states that will decide the election, Monday's events reiterate how important getting every constituency to show up and vote is to both campaigns.



Sponsor Message

Trump continues to be Trump

toggle caption Jim Watson/AFP via Getty Images

North Carolina is the only one of the seven swing states that Trump won in 2020, and is a key part of his path to victory in 2024.

In the aftermath of Hurricane Helene, which ripped across the South in late September, Trump has used the storm as a frequent opportunity to bash Harris, Biden and the federal government's response — and to tie everything back to his immigration views.

Speaking to reporters in a hard-hit area of Swannanoa, Trump repeated false claims about the Federal Emergency Management Agency's funding.

"They spent a lot of money on bringing illegal migrants, people that came into our country illegally, and taking them in," Trump said. "And all of the money they've spent — numbers that nobody can even believe. So they don't have any money for the people that live here."

Trump also declined to denounce threats of violence against FEMA and other federal employees after a North Carolina man was arrested for threats earlier this month.

"Does that mean that if they're doing a poor job, we're supposed to not say it?" Trump asked.

He also drastically exaggerated the number of pre-screened supporters that he served at a Pennsylvania McDonald's on Sunday and praised early voting numbers from the Tar Heel State.

At his Greenville rally, Trump reiterated his calls for mass deportations, closing the U.S.-Mexico border and attacked Harris as being the enabler of what he calls an "invasion" of America.

"So you're either stupid, you hate our country, or they're trying to get them to vote, right?" he said about Harris' immigration policies. "And it's probably the third. She's turning beautiful small towns into [a] third world dumping ground."

There’s no evidence to support claims about noncitizens voting illegally, and Trump himself acknowledged that he had not yet seen any evidence to suggest the election would not be fair. “Unfortunately, I know the other side, and they are not good. But I have not seen that," Trump said.

His suggestion that the final vote could be tainted fits with another part of Trump's closing message not grounded in reality: that the only way he loses is if there’s cheating.

Sponsor Message

At the faith event, Trump largely stuck to his usual campaign stump speech, vowing to "keep men out of women's sports" but also promising "we will proudly say Merry Christmas again," while baselessly accusing Harris, who is Baptist, of having anti-Christian bias.

Trump has another rally scheduled in Greensboro, N.C., Tuesday. He will also participate in a roundtable with Latino leaders in Florida.



Harris, Cheney and abortion rights

Harris' campaign pitch to Republicans exists on the complete opposite end of the spectrum from Trump's, both ideologically and rhetorically.

She spent Monday traveling the "Blue Wall" states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, with Cheney bringing a message to suburban voters that support for Harris is not incompatible with conservatism, even for those who oppose abortion.

"I think there are many of us around the country who have been pro-life, but who have watched what's going on in our states since the Dobbs decision and have watched state legislatures put in place laws that are resulting in women not getting the care they need," Cheney said in Pennsylvania, referring to the Supreme Court decision striking down the constitutional right to an abortion. "So I think this is not an issue that we're seeing break down across party lines."

The bulk of Harris' GOP outreach has been less about adopting more conservative stances of her own on policy issues, but more providing a permission structure for those who identify as Republican — but not as a Trump Republican — to feel like they can support her campaign against the former president.

"In this moment, there are millions of good and honorable people who Donald Trump has just fundamentally betrayed," Cheney said in Waukesha, Wis. "The decision to give somebody the power of the presidency means that you're handing someone the most awesome and significant power of any office anywhere in the world, and you have to choose people who have character, choose people of good faith."

Sponsor Message

Harris is scheduled to sit for interviews on Tuesday with NBC and Telemundo. Later this week, she is also slated to campaign with former President Barack Obama in Georgia, and participate in a town hall with CNN.
This article is the second in a five-part series called “Protecting the Election.” As former President Donald Trump and many of his allies refuse to concede his defeat in the 2020 election, this MSNBC Daily series brings election law and policy experts to explore the many threats to certifying election results at both the state and national levels.

With former President Donald Trump on the precipice of possibly becoming president again, let’s recall that he’s on the 2024 ballot thanks partly to the Supreme Court.

I’m not talking about the ruling granting him broad criminal immunity. Though the Roberts Court’s handling of that appeal helped Trump push off a trial in the federal election interference case — possibly forever, if he wins the election and deploys his reacquired presidential power to crush it.

I’m talking about another Jan. 6-related appeal from the last Supreme Court term, one that more directly positioned the Republican to take office again: Trump v. Anderson.

It was there that the justices reversed the Colorado Supreme Court’s decision to keep the former president from the ballot. The case was technically about one state during the primary process, but the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling effectively scrapped nationwide efforts to enforce the constitutional provision barring oath-breaking insurrectionists from office.

As a reminder, here’s what that post-Civil War provision, Section 3 of the 14th Amendment, says:

No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.

In a lengthy December decision, a majority of Colorado’s top court cited that language in agreeing that Trump “engaged in” the Jan. 6 insurrection after having sworn to support the Constitution as president.

“We are mindful of the magnitude and weight of the questions now before us,” the state court said Dec. 19, adding: “We are likewise mindful of our solemn duty to apply the law, without fear or favor, and without being swayed by public reaction to the decisions that the law mandates we reach.” The public reaction included threats against the Colorado judges.

Maine’s secretary of state reached the same conclusion later that month (and was likewise threatened), raising the stakes for the high court’s inevitable intervention.

The justices seemingly saw a Trump-friendly ruling as inevitable, too. During the Feb. 8 hearing in Washington, Chief Justice John Roberts worried about the “plain consequences” of permitting states like Colorado to disqualify insurrectionist candidates. He mused:

In very quick order, I would expect ... a goodly number of states will say, ‘Whoever the Democratic candidate is, you’re off the ballot,’ and others, for the Republican candidate, ‘You’re off the ballot,’ and it will come down to just a handful of states that are going to decide the presidential election. That’s a pretty daunting consequence.

That could be an understandable reaction from a random person not versed in the law or the facts. But this is the chief justice of the United States. For one thing, casual observers know that a handful of states basically do decide elections in our skewed Electoral College system. And more to the point, if any Democratic insurrectionists are blocked from the ballot, too, then that’s their problem. Even if Roberts’ stated concern was well-founded, it didn’t grapple with the law.

But the consequentialist view would prevail. It was just a matter of the court figuring out how to legally accomplish the practical goal of keeping Trump on the ballot. The decision came just ahead of the Super Tuesday primary voting day in March. It was an unsigned “per curiam” ruling, though it was actually authored by Roberts, according to a New York Times report that wasn’t confirmed by NBC News or MSNBC.

While the justices were unanimous on the bottom line that states couldn’t disqualify presidential candidates, the Times reported on the internal machinations:

four of the conservatives were pushing to go beyond that and rule that the Constitution’s prohibition would require congressional action to take effect. Such a decision would provide greater protection for Mr. Trump: To prevent him from taking office if he won re-election, Congress would have to vote to enforce the insurrectionist ban.

Roberts joined those four Republican appointees in the opinion that sparked two separate ones, both of which highlighted the lack of unanimity on the court. One of them came from the three Democratic appointees. Though styled a concurrence “in the judgment” (meaning on the bottom line), it reads at points more like a straight-up dissent, accusing the majority of needlessly resolving “novel constitutional questions to insulate this Court and petitioner [Trump] from future controversy.”

The other separate opinion came from Trump appointee Amy Coney Barrett. Adding her own bizarre thoughts to the affair, she agreed with the Democratic appointees that the majority went too far but nonetheless chided the trio for “stridency” in how it expressed disagreement.

Getting back to the substance of the matter, consider the view of conservative law professor William Baude. He previously clerked for Roberts and co-authored key scholarship before the ruling explaining why Trump is disqualified and, intriguingly, maintained in a post-ruling piece that Trump is still disqualified. He wrote in an op-ed after the decision that the Supreme Court:

swiftly overruled the [Colorado] decision without even confronting the question of whether Mr. Trump had engaged in an insurrection or was therefore disqualified from office. Instead it concocted an argument, not raised by any of the parties, that states specifically lack the power to consider this part of the Constitution in making ballot access decisions. Trump v. Anderson’s holding lacked any real basis in text and history and also is at odds with the basic structure of the Electoral College, in which states have primary authority to decide how their slates of electors are chosen. The ruling’s real function was to let the court reverse the Colorado Supreme Court and avoid the political firestorm that might have ensued, without requiring the court to take sides on what happened on Jan. 6.

Indeed, the available evidence — the hearing, the decision, the investigative reporting — suggests the court started from the conclusion that Trump just had to stay on the ballot and then attempted to reason backward from there.

And no doubt, it’s probably an understatement that a “political firestorm” would’ve ensued had the court held Trump to the Constitution. Look no further than the threats against judges and election officials who dared to rule against him on this issue and others. Look no further than the Trump-backed violence of Jan. 6.

So, what about the “plain consequences,” to use the chief justice’s concerned phrase, of an oath-breaking insurrectionist potentially running the country again, this time knowing he’d have broad criminal immunity heading into a second term? That consequence apparently was not “daunting” enough to move this court.

Subscribe to the Deadline: Legal Newsletter for expert analysis on the top legal stories of the week, including updates from the Supreme Court and developments in Donald Trump’s legal cases.
Pennsylvania election results may take days to count. And, ACLU fighting Louisiana law

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.



Today's top stories

The ACLU and other groups argued in federal court yesterday that a law passed in Louisiana earlier this year requiring schools to display the Ten Commandments in classrooms violates a Supreme Court precedent and the First Amendment. They sued the state to prevent the law from taking effect in January. This was the first time both parties met over the issue.

toggle caption John Bazemore/AP

🎧 The nine Louisiana families who are plaintiffs in the case argue that the law will harm children if it takes effect, Aubri Juhasz of NPR network station WWNO tells Up First. The main focus in court yesterday was whether the case can move forward, as attorneys argue that the plaintiffs don’t have a case until the posters go up in the classrooms. The U.S. Supreme Court struck down a similar law in Kentucky in 1980. The federal court judge in Baton Rouge says he will decide whether the case will move forward by Nov. 15.

This week, Russian President Vladimir Putin hosts many leaders of the world’s fastest-developing economies at the 2024 BRICS summit. The Kremlin says 22 world leaders will attend and is billing it as the biggest foreign policy summit in Russia’s history. Putin says companies from BRICS countries already dominate key economic industries like energy and agriculture and will be the key drivers of the global economy in the future.



Sponsor Message

🎧 NPR’s Charles Maynes says the Kremlin would argue this is the latest proof that Russia is not isolated over its invasion of Ukraine, as the West would claim. The event will feature closely monitored bilateral meetings, including between Russia and Iran. Maynes suggests that if Putin has his way, the conference will make progress in reducing the dominance of the U.S. dollar. He is keen on observing BRICS nations develop new financial tools that could protect economies like Russia from Western sanctions.

Former President Donald Trump and Vice President Harris made two separate but equally important pitches to Republicans on Monday while campaigning in swing states. In North Carolina, Trump repeated false claims about FEMA’s funding in the aftermath of Hurricane Helene, tying this back to his viewpoint on immigration. Meanwhile, as Harris traveled to the “Blue Wall” states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, her GOP outreach has been less about adopting more conservative stances of her policies, but more about positioning herself as an alternative to Trump.



We, the voters

toggle caption Carlos Osorio/AP/AP

NPR is visiting six key swing states that will likely decide this year’s historic election. This week, Morning Edition is in Pennsylvania to listen to voters about what matters to them and how that will affect their vote.

It is unlikely we'll know who won the battleground state of Pennsylvania on Election night. That's because a law created four years ago doesn't allow election officials to open mail-in ballots until the morning of Nov. 5. Lehigh County Executive Phil Armstrong says the county will have thousands of ballots to go through, and the longer it takes, the more people will think something has gone wrong. Pennsylvania’s Secretary of the Commonwealth Al Schmidt, who oversees the state's vote count, breaks down the process on Morning Edition with host Michel Martin.



Sponsor Message

Picture show

toggle caption Sope Adelaja for NPR

“Severe child food poverty” is on the rise. One in four children under the age of five worldwide is unable to access a nutritious diet, according to a UNICEF report. This amounts to 181 million young children. Rising food prices, climate crises, harmful food-marketing strategies, disruptions in food supply and other factors are contributing to the problem. In addition, low-income countries struggle to regulate aggressive advertising of processed snack foods, leading to many children consuming unhealthy, inexpensive options instead of nutrient-rich foods.



📷 See photos of how nine families cope when they can't afford three healthy meals daily.

3 things to know before you go

toggle caption AP/Houston Fire Department

Four people are dead, including a child, after a helicopter crashed into a radio tower in Houston Sunday night, officials say. The men known as the Central Park Five are suing former President Donald Trump for defamation over comments he made during last month's presidential debate, according to a lawsuit filed. The men were exonerated after being wrongfully convicted in 1989 of a brutal assault on a New York jogger. Samantha Hodge-Williams had to undergo emergency surgery when doctors discovered an ovarian mass in 1996. A singing aesthetician — and unsung hero — helped ease her stress on the operating table, and has stayed in her thoughts through multiple surgeries later in her life.

This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.
Trump has made more than 100 threats to prosecute or punish perceived enemies

toggle caption Scott Olson/Getty Images

With just two weeks remaining until the presidential election, former President Donald Trump has used his most recent appearances on podcast and cable interviews to escalate attacks on fellow Americans whom he calls “the enemy from within.”

In one recent interview, Trump said that if “radical left lunatics” disrupt the election, “it should be very easily handled by — if necessary, by National Guard, or if really necessary, by the military.”

That statement, on Fox News, was not the first time Trump has expressed support for using government force against domestic political rivals. Since 2022, when he began preparing for the presidential campaign, Trump has issued more than 100 threats to investigate, prosecute, imprison or otherwise punish his perceived opponents, NPR has found.

Sponsor Message

A review of Trump’s rally speeches, press conferences, interviews and social media posts shows that the former president has repeatedly indicated that he would use federal law enforcement as part of a campaign to exact “retribution.”

Vice President Kamala Harris “should be impeached and prosecuted,” Trump said at a rally last month.

“I will appoint a real special prosecutor to go after the most corrupt president in the history of the United States of America, Joe Biden, and the entire Biden crime family,” Trump said last year.

“ELIZABETH LYNNE CHENEY IS GUILTY OF TREASON,” reads one post Trump reposted on his social media site, Truth Social, regarding the former Republican congresswoman. “RETRUTH IF YOU WANT TELEVISED MILITARY TRIBUNALS.”

Journalists who decline to identify the sources of leaked information would also face imprisonment, Trump said.

“If the reporter doesn't want to tell you, it's ‘bye-bye,’ the reporter goes to jail,” Trump said in 2022. He appeared to suggest that the reporter could also face sexual assault while in custody.

Trump and his allies have either downplayed these threats, or said that these actions would be justified, in part, because of the four criminal prosecutions brought against Trump since he left office. In one of those cases, a New York jury found Trump guilty of 34 felony counts in connection with hush money he paid to keep an alleged affair with adult film actress Stormy Daniels secret. He is appealing that verdict.

Sponsor Message

When right-wing radio host Glenn Beck asked Trump if he would lock up his opponents in a second term, Trump responded, “The answer is you have no choice because they’re doing it to us.”

Legal experts said that there are few guardrails preventing Trump from pursuing his plans to prosecute opponents and noted that Trump pressured the Department of Justice to investigate rivals during his first term. In about a dozen cases, the Justice Department followed through and initiated investigations, according to one analysis.

If Trump follows through on his stated plans in a second term, these experts said, his actions could endanger Americans’ civil liberties and cause a chilling effect on criticism of the president. The threats he’s made have already led some of his targets to prepare for the worst by saving money and considering whether to leave the country if Trump wins the election.

“This is how autocrats cement their permanent grip on power,” said Ian Bassin, the executive director of the nonprofit group Protect Democracy, which advocates for protections against authoritarianism.

Many of Trump’s threats relate to his persistent false claims about election fraud and the lie that he won the 2020 election.

“START ARRESTING THE POLL WORKERS AND WATCH HOW FAST THEY TELL YOU WHO TOLD THEM TO CHEAT,” reads a message Trump reposted on social media in 2023.

He has also repeatedly targeted the prosecutors, judges and even courtroom staff connected to the prosecutions against him for alleged election interference, improperly holding classified documents and business fraud.

toggle caption Pool/Getty Images

New York Attorney General Letitia James and Judge Arthur Engoron “should be arrested and punished accordingly,” Trump said at a rally in January. James successfully brought a civil fraud case against Trump, which Engoron presided over. Trump is appealing the judgment against him. He also reposted a message attacking a member of the Georgia grand jury that indicted him.

Among the other targets of Trump’s threats are former President Barack Obama (“RETRUTH IF YOU WANT PUBLIC MILITARY TRIBUNALS”), members of the U.S. Capitol Police who defended the Capitol during the Jan. 6, 2021, riot (“The cops should be charged and the protesters should be freed”), members of the Jan. 6 Select Committee in Congress (“They should be prosecuted for their lies and, quite frankly, TREASON!”), Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg (“We are watching him closely, and if he does anything illegal this time he will spend the rest of his life in prison”), people who criticize the Supreme Court (“These people should be put in jail, the way they talk about our judges and our justices”) and protesters who burn the American flag (“You should get a one-year jail sentence if you desecrate the American flag”).

Sponsor Message

In one instance, Trump suggested that Gen. Mark Milley, who served as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in his administration, could face execution for calling officials in China to try and defuse tensions in the chaotic aftermath of the Jan. 6 attack.

“This is an act so egregious that, in times gone by, the punishment would have been DEATH!” Trump wrote on Truth Social.

Milley, who retired in 2023, has since told journalist Bob Woodward that Trump is “fascist to the core” and “the most dangerous person to this country.”

In addition to using the powers under criminal law, Trump has also promised to take greater control of agencies like the Federal Communications Commission, which regulates broadcast television and radio, including NPR’s network of member stations.

After his presidential debate against Harris on ABC News, Trump called for the FCC to revoke ABC’s broadcast license, due to his perception of the moderators’ bias. He also called for an investigation of CBS News for campaign finance violations after it aired an interview with Vice President Harris. He’s previously floated pulling the license for NBC, as well, over criticisms of its news coverage.

“I absolutely think he will follow up on those threats,” said Stephanie Grisham, who worked for Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign and served as his White House press secretary. Grisham resigned in the aftermath of the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol and has since become a vocal critic of her former boss.

“I just know that once he's in office with no guardrails, no reason to worry about reelection, and only the most fervent, loyal people surrounding him,” Grisham said, “he will absolutely make sure his enemies pay for what he perceives to be their crimes.”

John Bolton, who served as national security adviser in the Trump White House, said at an event earlier this year that he believed Trump would use the Department of Justice to enact a “retribution presidency.”

Sponsor Message

In response to NPR’s reporting, the Republican National Committee issued a statement.

“Kamala Harris is the threat to democracy,” said RNC spokesperson Anna Kelly. “She and Joe Biden weaponized our justice system in order to sway an election.”

Loading...

Trump’s claims of a “witch hunt”

Amid this flood of threats against his opponents, Trump has repeatedly accused the Biden administration of “weaponizing” the Justice Department and subjecting him to “political persecution” and a “witch hunt.”

Judges presiding over Trump’s criminal cases have rejected those arguments.

Biden did state publicly that subjects of the Jan. 6 Select Committee’s investigation should face prosecution for defying subpoenas. He later said that comment was “inappropriate.” But there’s no evidence that Biden has directed the federal cases against Trump. Those cases are being led by special counsel Jack Smith.

During Biden’s presidency, the Justice Department has also brought prosecutions against several high-profile Democrats, including former New Jersey Sen. Robert Menendez and New York Mayor Eric Adams, as well as the president’s son, Hunter Biden.

Vice President Harris has generally avoided commenting on Trump’s federal criminal cases. When supporters at recent campaign rallies started chanting “lock him up,” she told the crowd, “We’re gonna let the courts handle that.”



Could Trump actually order prosecutions of his enemies?

After the widespread abuses of presidential power by Richard Nixon, subsequent administrations generally sought to give the Department of Justice more independence from the White House, in part to insulate the agency from electoral politics.

But legal experts and former government officials said those rules and norms can be overturned or ignored.

“There are not really legal restrictions or even structural restrictions that would stop the president, if he were to appoint loyalists to be the lead prosecutors in all 93 jurisdictions around the country, from simply directing them to go and investigate his perceived opponents,” said Bassin, who also served as associate White House counsel in the Obama administration. “If he appointed a loyal director of the FBI, he would be able to make life pretty miserable for the people he is targeting.”

Sponsor Message

Trump has said he will appoint the “most ferocious legal warriors against crime and Communist corruption that this country has ever seen.”

Trump’s allies have also promised to weaken or even end the Justice Department’s independence from the White House if he returns to office, which would give Trump and his political appointees greater ability to direct the federal prosecutions.

“The president has the authority under the Constitution to conduct law enforcement,” Russ Vought, a former Trump administration official and a leader of the Heritage Foundation’s Project 2025 blueprint, told NPR last year. Vought added that “I think you can absolutely trust Donald Trump” not to use the Justice Department for partisan purposes.

The Supreme Court also recently removed one potential guardrail preventing political prosecutions in its ruling on Trump’s claim of presidential immunity.

“One of the most remarkable lines in that Supreme Court opinion is that a sitting president could order their Justice Department to engage in a ‘sham’ investigation,” said Ryan Goodman, a law professor at New York University. “So a president would not have to fear criminal accountability for ordering a sham investigation of their perceived enemies.”

One final check against political prosecutions is the judicial branch. Judges can refuse to authorize search and arrest warrants. If an investigation leads to an actual prosecution, judges can also dismiss charges and juries can acquit defendants. But the process alone can do significant damage to a target’s reputation and finances, regardless of the final outcome. And both Trump and running mate JD Vance have suggested they might ignore the judiciary’s decisions.

Trump posted on Truth Social that “massive fraud” in the 2020 election justified “the termination of all rules, regulations, and articles, even those found in the Constitution.” In a 2021 interview, Vance said Trump should ignore court rulings if they constrain the administration’s ability to replace career officials with political loyalists.

Sponsor Message

“Much of this depends upon the character of the individual in the White House and the character of those surrounding them,” said Goodman, “because there's so many levers of power that they can use.”



Trump’s actions in his first term

Trump made the prosecution of Hillary Clinton, his Democratic rival in the 2016 election, a centerpiece of his first presidential campaign. “Lock her up” became a perennial call-and-response between Trump and his supporters at rallies.

And while the Justice Department under Trump did not ultimately charge Clinton, there’s substantial evidence that his pressure on prosecutors did have an impact in some cases.

“President Trump treated the Department of Justice like his own personal law firm, and he put people in charge there who did his bidding,” said Geoffrey Berman, who served as U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York during the Trump administration, in a 2022 interview with WHYY’s Fresh Air. “The Justice Department targeted political enemies of the president and assisted political allies of the president.”

One of Trump’s most frequent targets in his first term was Andrew McCabe, a longtime FBI official who became the bureau’s acting director when Trump fired James Comey in 2017.

toggle caption Andrew Harrer/Getty Images

While in office, Trump attempted to “purge” the FBI of people he perceived as disloyal, McCabe said in an interview.

Trump repeatedly attacked McCabe, because he was in the leadership of the FBI during the investigation into Russian interference with the 2016 election and because he perceived McCabe as a partisan enemy. McCabe considered himself a moderate Republican, but Trump seized on the fact that McCabe’s wife had run unsuccessfully for the Virginia state Senate in 2015 as a Democrat.

Trump publicly pressured the department to fire McCabe before he would be eligible to receive retirement benefits, writing on Twitter, “FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe is racing the clock to retire with full benefits. 90 days to go?!!!”

Sponsor Message

“It was clear to me, he was basically saying, ‘I'm going to do whatever I can to fire this guy before he can retire,’” McCabe said.

Department of Justice leaders demoted and then fired McCabe just hours before that deadline.

“Andrew McCabe FIRED, a great day for the hard working men and women of the FBI,” Trump posted. “A great day for Democracy.”

Internal investigators at the Justice Department said that McCabe “lacked candor” about his contacts with journalists — an allegation McCabe denies — and federal prosecutors opened a criminal investigation into McCabe that dragged on for nearly two years.

McCabe said he was with his wife and two children when the news of the criminal investigation leaked.

“It was just an incredibly sad moment and really scary for them, because it was the first time that I think they had ever considered that what had been political nonsense might actually cost me my liberty,” McCabe said. “And it's also humiliating. It's embarrassing.”

Federal Judge Reggie Walton, a George W. Bush appointee, questioned prosecutors over their handling of the case and Trump’s apparent influence over it.

“I don't think people like the fact that you got somebody at the top basically trying to dictate whether somebody should be prosecuted,” Walton said. “I just think it's a banana republic when we go down that road.”

Prosecutors ultimately dropped the case without bringing charges.

McCabe sued the Department of Justice over his firing. After Trump left office, he received a settlement that restored his back pay, retirement benefits and rank.

McCabe was not the only target, according to an analysis co-written by Goodman. He found 11 other cases in which Trump pushed the Justice Department to investigate his rivals.

“There is an established track record of Trump having done this before,” said Goodman of NYU. “It's not pure rhetoric.”

Sponsor Message

In one instance described in the Mueller report and cited by Goodman, Trump urged then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions to prosecute Hillary Clinton. (Trump also urged prosecution publicly on Twitter.) Federal prosecutors in Utah later opened an investigation into Clinton and the Clinton Foundation without bringing charges. Hillary Clinton remained one of Trump’s most frequent targets even after he left office. Last year, he reposted a video with calls to “lock her up” for alleged treason.

The Jan. 6 Select Committee in Congress presented additional evidence of Trump putting pressure on prosecutors to say they found widespread fraud in the 2020 election, despite a lack of evidence.

“What I'm just asking you to do is to say it was corrupt and leave the rest to me and the Republican congressmen," Trump told officials in his Justice Department, according to testimony obtained by the select committee.

“Trump was absolutely willing to use the Justice Department for his ends,” former Republican Congressman Adam Kinzinger, a member of the select committee, told NPR.

toggle caption Evan Vucci/AP

Preparing for the worst

Trump continues to threaten McCabe.

Steve Bannon, who served as Trump’s chief strategist in the White House and remains a prominent supporter, said on his podcast that McCabe “should be worried” that Trump would go after him if he returns to the White House.

“You should be very worried,” Bannon said. “But also understand this, brother, we have extradition treaties with virtually every country in the world. And you go ahead and run and run as far as you want. We're going to come and get you." (Bannon is currently serving a four-month prison sentence for contempt of Congress and is due to be released at the end of October.)

Trump reposted Bannon’s comments on Truth Social.

“It shows you, I think, and in serious terms, a persistent commitment to this idea of ‘we are going on the revenge tour,’” McCabe said in response to those comments.

Sponsor Message

McCabe said he has had difficult conversations with his family about what Trump might do if he returns to the White House, and he knows other former officials who are also contemplating leaving the country.

“I don't intend to leave the country that I served for 21 years,” McCabe said. “But this kind of pits you against your children and your spouses who just want you to be safe.”

Grisham said she is also making preparations in case Trump returns to the White House — and saving up money.

Trump has not threatened her with jail time or prosecution, but did attack her in personal terms after she published a book critical of the administration.

“I'm definitely fearful for myself and for many of my friends who have spoken out, too,” Grisham said. “It's a terrifying thought, because that is literally the most powerful person in the world that knows you and wants only bad for you. It's truly a terrifying thought.”
Labour insists it is not funding the travel or accommodation for the activists, meaning its efforts remain within strict U.S. federal election rules which stipulate foreign volunteers can’t spend more than $1,000 helping candidates.

But the Trump campaign questioned those sums in its formal letter to the Federal Election Commission, arguing the LinkedIn post suggested Labour could be stumping up costs for the activists.

“Those searching for foreign interference in our elections need to look no further than [the] LinkedIn post,” said the letter, from Trump campaign lawyer Gary Lawkowski. “The interference is occurring in plain sight.”

Lawkowski demanded the FEC launch an immediate investigation into the matter.

“Those searching for foreign interference in our elections need to look no further than [the] LinkedIn post,” said the letter, from Trump campaign lawyer Gary Lawkowski. “The interference is occurring in plain sight.” | Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

He also quipped: “This past week marked the 243 anniversary [sic] of the surrender of British forces at the Battle of Yorktown, a military victory that ensured that the United States would be politically independent of Great Britian [sic]. It appears that the Labour Party and the Harris for President campaign have forgotten the message.”

The U.K. government has previously insisted the party activists are volunteering in the U.S. on a personal basis, and that their help does not represent the position of the U.K. government. POLITICO reported last week how U.K. Labour and the U.S. Democrats, including center-left think tanks in Washington and London, have been coordinating in a bid to boost their electoral chances.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
But in her next breath she warned that now isn’t the time for victory laps.

Ever-rising debt levels and the splintering of global trade under the pressure of geopolitical rivalries have cast a long shadow over the meetings, which begin in earnest Tuesday. The uncertainty is only fueled by the wars raging in both Eastern Europe and the Middle East — and by next month’s presidential election in the United States — all of which could move the needle in various directions.

Public debt, in particular, has already emerged as a key focus of this week’s discussions. Governments in many parts of the world appear to have lost control of their finances due in large part to pandemic-era emergency support measures, which widened existing budget gaps. Global public debt is set to hit an unimaginable $100 trillion this year, and is on course to top 100 percent of world gross domestic product by 2030, the IMF said last week in an advance release from its Fiscal Monitor.

Causes for concern are everywhere. In the U.S., the budget deficit is expected to cross 6 percent of GDP in 2024 even though the country started the year at what many would have considered the top of the economic cycle, with tax revenues plentiful and little need for government support measures. But that hasn’t proven to be the case this cycle, as the administration of President Joe Biden has thrown money at reshoring manufacturing jobs, especially in politically sensitive sectors such as chip production.

Inflation won a second lease on life through food and energy markets after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is on the retreat. | Brandon Bell/Getty Images

In Europe, the staggering cost of the subsidies needed to keep the economy on life support earlier in the decade has become clearer. Even Germany is struggling to bring its deficit back in line with its own rules and those of the EU, and now faces a second straight year without growth. Berlin has even joined the likes of Paris and Rome in having to ask the European Commission for extra time to get its finances back in order.

China, meanwhile, is still working its way through a real estate crash, with no clarity on who will be left holding billions of dollars in debt that will never be repaid. Beijing has unveiled a suite of measures to sustain growth, but analysts are not convinced they will do the trick. Official data released last week showed the economy grew only 4.6 percent in the third quarter compared to the same period in 2023 — below expectations and undershooting President Xi Jinping’s 5 percent target.
2 years in, Trump surrogate Elon Musk has remade X as a conservative megaphone

toggle caption Ryan Collerd/AFP via Getty Images

On the eve of Election Day in 2022, Elon Musk took to Twitter to urge Americans to choose Republicans in the midterm elections.

"Shared power curbs the worst excesses of both parties, therefore I recommend voting for a Republican Congress, given that the Presidency is Democratic," he wrote.

Since the pandemic, Musk's personal politics have grown more conservative, fueled by his frustrations over how COVID-19 restrictions affected Tesla's factory operations and his belief that free speech is under attack in the United States.

But his explicit endorsement of Republicans on Twitter came less than two weeks after he closed his fraught $44 billion purchase of the social networking site on Oct. 27, 2022.

Sponsor Message

For the owner of one of the internet’s most influential public squares to openly endorse one political party shocked many observers — especially since only six months earlier, as Musk agreed to buy the company, he declared that "For Twitter to deserve public trust, it must be politically neutral, which effectively means upsetting the far right and the far left equally."

Now, as both the 2024 election and the second anniversary of Musk's takeover of Twitter loom, the billionaire has completely evaporated any notion of political neutrality on the platform he's renamed X because his influence on it remains outsized.

Musk has put his money and mouth behind returning Donald Trump to the White House, pouring $75 million into a super PAC he created to turn out voters in battleground states and using X to cheerlead for Trump, smear Vice President Kamala Harris, and amplify rumors and conspiracy theories to his 202 million followers.

"This is a textbook example of the influence that I think it's fair to say an oligarch can have in a way that really is impactful to the entire body politic," said Eddie Perez, who directed Twitter's election integrity work before Musk took over. He's now a board member at the OSET Institute, a nonprofit focused on election infrastructure.

"And it is purely by virtue of that money, visibility and the control of a social media platform that he's able to behave in such a way," Perez said.

Sponsor Message

Musk and X didn’t respond to requests for comment.



Musk taps his fortune for Trump

Musk's most tangible support for Trump has come from his wallet and his newfound side gig as a MAGA rally hype man. He created — and is the largest donor to — America PAC, which has emerged as a key part of the Trump campaign's get-out-the-vote efforts, thanks to new rules allowing political candidates to coordinate canvassing with outside groups. The super PAC is also funding Republican House races and offering $1 million prizes to registered voters in battleground states who sign a petition supporting the First and Second Amendments to the U.S. Constitution. Election law experts and Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro have raised questions about whether the sweepstakes may violate federal law against paying people to register to vote.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

Since endorsing the former president after the July assassination attempt, Musk has ramped up his public promotion: interviewing Trump live on X, appearing with him at a rally in Butler, Pa., at the site of the first attempt on Trump’s life, and conducting his own town halls in Pennsylvania.

Never known for his subtlety, Musk has portrayed the stakes of the presidential election in dire terms, saying "the fate of Western civilization" is on the line.

Business executives, including longtime tech investor Marc Andreessen and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman, have long raised money and backed political candidates from both parties. But executives typically separate those efforts from their public roles at their companies, said Katie Harbath, CEO of tech consulting firm Anchor Change, who spent a decade working on public policy and elections at Facebook.

"Before, CEOs would do fundraisers in the privacy of their own home with their friends," she said, "because oftentimes they knew from a business standpoint they needed to be careful about maintaining relationships with both sides of the aisle."

Sponsor Message

In contrast, she said, "Elon acting as a surrogate, going to the rallies, being onstage, doing his own events, doing that town hall, being that public during an election season … it is definitely bigger and bolder and a lot more in-your-face."

Musk is not the first media owner to use his platform to push his own political views. Rupert Murdoch created modern conservative media with Fox News; William Randolph Hearst used his newspapers to rally support for the Spanish-American War.

But Musk's outspoken advocacy for Trump stands out given what X is and the role he plays there, Harbath said. Even though the social network has lost users and advertisers since Musk's purchase, it remains a political and cultural force around the world. Musk is the most followed account on the platform, and his posts are regularly suggested by X's algorithm to users who don't follow him.

To some former Twitter employees, Musk's name change is a convenient way to mark the end of an era.

toggle caption Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

"I'm glad he changed the name," said Erik Berlin, a former X engineering manager who left last year. "Because I can still refer to Twitter, which refers to the entity that existed before Elon took over."



Pro-Trump posts and Musk's every thought

Regardless of who users follow, both posts by Musk and pro-Trump content have become unavoidable on X.

Twitter’s previous leadership banned Trump in 2021 after his supporters breached the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, saying his tweets broke its rules against glorifying violence. One of Musk’s first big changes after taking control was to reinstate Trump after an unscientific poll of the site’s users. However, Trump has not posted as much as he did before the ban and uses his own Truth Social platform as his primary outlet.

While Musk has in the past instructed engineers to figure out ways to turn up the reach of his own posts, it's not clear he has also done so for pro-Trump content, though Musk has drastically ramped up his own posts about Trump in recent months.

Sponsor Message

"There's no doubt that Elon has a political bent. I don't know if that is encoded into the algorithm," said ex-Twitter manager Berlin. "Largely I just think it's a reflection of the user base, all the Elon fans and Trump fans."

Indeed, Musk taking up the Trump mantle has made the platform a more welcome place for the former president's supporters. But any theory about exactly how Musk and his deputies could be tinkering with X's algorithm is hard to prove, since studying the site has become more difficult under Musk.

toggle caption Chris Delmas/AFP via Getty Images

"You just have less ability for independent researchers to even try to get a sense of what might be happening on the platform and what's getting boosted," Harbath said.

For instance, accessing the site's backend data used to be easy and free, allowing academics, researchers and journalists to study how messages flow on the platform. Now, such access is behind a paywall. And some researchers fear undertaking independent examinations of content on X, since Musk has a record of suing advocacy groups and watchdogs who publicize reports critical of the site. In sum, it is just hard to definitively know what is happening on X.

"Is there more of it now or less of it now? These questions are just hard to quantify on Musk's Twitter," Berlin said.

And not everybody sees the same thing on X; the mix of posts a person encounters is based on their own past interactions with the site. It's easy to accidentally reinforce content by watching a video, or clicking through to an account, or trying to determine how and why something is appearing on your timeline. Those kinds of actions, Berlin said, are likely to result in the user seeing even more of that type of content, be it pro-Trump posts or anything else.

Sponsor Message

"This is how Twitter has always worked: The longer you linger on it because you're curious about what you're seeing, the more the algorithm will think you want more of it," he said.



Distortions, falsehoods, conspiracy theories

Musk is increasingly using his own feed on X as a megaphone for his political views. In addition to support for Trump and attacks on Harris and Democrats, he regularly traffics in unverified rumors, misleading claims and outright falsehoods, through what he posts himself and what he reshares or replies to from others.

This year he has become one of the leading boosters of baseless claims that Democrats are bringing in immigrants to illegally vote for them — a conspiracy theory that Trump and other Republicans have made core to their narratives about the 2024 election.

He has amplified the falsehood that Haitian migrants are eating pets and spread debunked claims that the federal government is failing to help victims of hurricanes Helene and Milton. He also shared an anti-Ukraine meme that was created by a Russian intelligence operation, according to leaked documents obtained by a consortium of European news outlets.

In the wake of two assassination attempts against Trump, he has repeatedly questioned why no one is trying to assassinate Harris. He's posted an AI-generated image of Harris dressed as a "communist dictator" and reshared a manipulated parody video purporting to show Harris calling herself "the ultimate diversity hire," without any disclosure that it was a parody.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

"There has been a real distortion and acceleration and almost a radicalization of the views that he is willing to amplify," said Perez, the former Twitter election integrity director.

"If he were not the person doing it with 200 million followers, these are voices, pernicious voices, that cause division, polarization and harm, that otherwise might not be getting so much attention," Perez said.

Sponsor Message

Harbath says that despite his large following, Musk may not actually be changing people's minds with his political posts. But she worries that he might use his megaphone in the period after Election Day to incite harassment of election workers or even violence.

Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson told CBS News that she and her staff received threats and harassing messages after Musk posted false claims about the state’s voter rolls and called her a liar when she fact-checked him.

When far-right anti-immigrant protests erupted in the United Kingdom this summer, Musk repeated conspiracy theories and posted "civil war is inevitable," earning a rebuke from the British government.

"That just purely comes from the fact that there are people that listen to him," Harbath said of her concerns that Musk could stoke post-election violence. "There's also the mob mentality of once he starts posting it on [X], other people start posting it on the platform. They also start posting it across other platforms. And so, you know, does that cause these people to get more mobilized?"



X's financial outlook: Value down nearly 80%

When Musk bought Twitter, he loaded the company up with $13 billion in debt — loans extended by a collection of banks optimistic that the mercurial tech mogul could turn the long-struggling social media site into a moneymaking machine.

In the time since Musk began his hostile takeover of the platform, just the opposite has come true.

toggle caption Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

Fidelity, which was a major investor in Musk's Twitter takeover, estimated in September that the value of its stake in the site has plummeted by nearly 80%, suggesting that the entire value of X could now stand around $9 billion.

Usage also appears to be down since Musk's purchase. Market intelligence firm Sensor Tower estimated that X's daily active users globally were 28% lower in September this year compared to the same time before Musk's purchase.

Sponsor Message

At the same time, Musk has drastically cut the company's expenses, with the total staff size now about 20% what it was before his purchase. That included gutting content moderation teams that policed the site for hate speech, harassment and other content that turns off advertisers and many users.

"I think it's unmistakable that the brand equity of Twitter and now X has been seriously damaged," Perez said. Ultimately, Perez sees Musk's willingness to "slash and burn" as evidence he's motivated less by traditional business concerns than by "this idea that I want the values and the narratives and the messages that I like to be heard."

"I think that Musk's purchase of X, of Twitter, and the manner in which he has transformed X into what it is today is [because], fundamentally, he is a culture warrior," he said.

Still, Musk's goal of making money from sources beyond advertising appears to have hit a snag.

He hoped subscriptions for verified badges and other tools would make up more than half of the company's revenue, but an analysis published last week by TechCrunch estimated that about 1.3 million people are paying users, representing less than 1% of the app's total global users.

The failure to figure out new ways of making money is exacerbated by the struggles of X's core advertising business, which also has been suffering since an advertiser boycott took hold late last year.

"Most companies in this situation would not make it," said a former X executive who worked in the company's advertising division who would not speak publicly for fear of reprisal. "But this guy has all the money in the world to keep it going, so why won't he?"
With two weeks to go, the race for the White House may hinge on whether Donald Trump can cash in a big bet.

Spurning a traditional playbook of welcoming back estranged Republicans and fighting for votes in the middle, Trump is instead trying to create a winning coalition by adding new, younger voters who embrace him for his very defiance of what’s expected of a politician.

The problem? No one knows whether they’ll actually show up.

Trump’s strategy relies on what campaigns call low-propensity voters: those who don’t consistently participate in elections. There’s no question there is a large population of young, male, often white (though not exclusively) Americans who find Trump’s antics and tough guy schtick appealing and think Democrats are a drag. Trump and his campaign have methodically wooed this bro vote; it’s no doubt played a role in his strength with men in the polls.

So-called Nikki Haley voters would have been an obvious place for Trump to go fishing for votes outside of his base, but his ego wouldn’t allow him to seek the approval of those who spurned him in the primary. Instead, Trump is hoping his largely outsourced voter contact operation, as well as a legion of online influencers, can convince young men to get off YouTube and into a polling place.

Every campaign tries to squeeze out as many marginal votes as it can, but no recent one has banked so heavily on a low-participation voting bloc to turn out. If Trump wins, it may be because he’s once again figured out a new formula that didn't require him to moderate his impulses.

Sign up for MSNBC’s new How to Win 2024 newsletter and get election insights like this delivered to your inbox.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

When Taylor Swift came out to endorse Vice President Kamala Harris last month, it was the Instagram post heard ’round the world (or at least ’round the TikTok FYP algorithm).

“I’m voting for @kamalaharris because she fights for the rights and causes I believe need a warrior to champion them,” Swift wrote immediately following the first, and only, debate between Harris and former President Donald Trump. She signed her message “Taylor Swift, Childless Cat Lady” — a knock at Republican vice presidential nominee JD Vance, who has used the term to demean women without children.

Advertisement

With her simultaneous endorsement of the Democrat and swipe at the Republican, Swift, at 34 arguably the most famous millennial woman in U.S. pop culture, also made herself the avatar of an ongoing shift in politics among her demographic of young women: For the past few decades, they have been tilting decidedly left.

“It’s popping out in the polling because it’s more dramatic this year than it has been in other years,” said Elaine Kamarck, director of the Center for Effective Public Management at the Brookings Institution.

Advertisement

“You hear important people talking like this, and you say, ‘What the hell?’ You know, ‘People with children should have more votes than people without children.’ What?” laughed Kamarck.

“Between Vance and Trump, they are articulating an amazingly old-fashioned notion of women’s role in society,” she added.

The shift of young women leftward is not a particularly new trend. Women are regularly more liberal than their male peers, and young people are regularly more liberal than their older counterparts.

What is new, and intriguing, is the way that shift has picked up steam in recent years.

“After [2015], it rises at a much faster clip,” said Lydia Saad, director of U.S. social research at Gallup.

A Gallup analysis published by Saad and two co-authors in September found that the number of young women ages 18-29 who identify as liberal is increasing more rapidly than in the past. In the period from 2001 to 2007, some 28% of women in that age group identified as liberal, a share that increased to 32% in the period from 2008 to 2016. But in the period from 2016 to 2024, that number jumped even higher, to 40% of young women.

Advertisement

“It definitely goes up at a faster rate when you get post-2015, with some significant ups and downs in there,” Saad said. “It’s not a continuous upward trajectory.”

She also noted that the research only focuses on women who were ages 18-29 at the time of polling, which means the data reflects the views of multiple generations, rather than the changing attitude of a steady cohort. The overall picture also shows some variance by race: White and Black women under age 50 have especially moved to the left, while Hispanic women have largely stayed the same or even shifted rightward.

“But even with the ups and downs, we’ve ended up at a place that’s significantly higher, on a percent level, than it was in 2015,” Saad said.

And while young women are shifting left, young men are staying relatively moderate. Sixty-three percent of young women in 2001-2007 had views closer to those of liberals than of conservatives, a figure that jumped to 78% in the 2008-2016 period and then to 87% in the 2017-2024 period. Young men, meanwhile, saw those same figures move from 47% to 57%, and then fall to 50% for the period from 2017 to 2024.

The divide is becoming ever clearer as the 2024 election approaches. According to a fall 2024 Harvard Youth Poll, Harris has a 31-point lead over Trump among likely voters under 30 — and when it comes to likely female voters in that age group, Harris leads 70% to 23%. “Brat,” indeed.

Advertisement

A woman enters the Orange County Supervisor of Elections office on Oct. 17 in Orlando, Florida. In the past four decades, women have turned out to vote at higher rates than men. Anadolu via Getty Images

Combine that with women’s greater propensity to actually show up to the polls, and things get even hotter. In terms of ballot box turnout, women have outshone men in every presidential election since 1980. In 2020, 68% of eligible women showed up to vote, compared to 65% of men. In a presidential race that is already uncomfortably close, that 3% difference could be crucial.

EMILY’s List, which has been tracking women’s interest in voting, says the organization saw a 56-point increase between April and late July in the share of women under 45 who said they felt motivated to vote. (Late July is, perhaps not coincidentally, when President Joe Biden dropped out of the race and threw his support behind Harris.)

“Youth turnout has been historic over the past three election cycles,” said Abby Kiesa, deputy director at Tufts University’s Center for Information & Research on Civic Learning and Engagement, which studies youth political engagement. “The last presidential election, we saw young women turn out at rates higher than their peers who identify as men in every race and ethnicity for which we had data.” In 2020, 50% of young voters cast their ballots — which, while still lower than the 67% national turnout, was an 11% increase over 2016.

In 2024, CIRCLE estimates that Gen Z comprises some 41 million eligible voters, of which half are women, and that young women have swung for the Democratic candidate by an average of 2 to 1 in every election since 2008. In 2024, the youth voting influence is expected to be strongest in states that are already battlegrounds — Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania top the list.

Advertisement

To boot, many of these battleground states already have a substantial gender gap when it comes to turnout. An analysis published by Kamarck in early October, which combined 2020 voter turnout by gender with 2024 candidate preference by gender, found that the gender gap favors Harris in five out of seven swing states. Only in Georgia and Arizona does the gender discrepancy favor Trump.

“If the composition of the electorate between men and women remains the same as it was in 2020, Harris could win Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Nevada ― all states Biden won in 2020,” plus North Carolina, Kamarck wrote.

Saad’s analysis cited a few issues as key to the shift among young women, such as climate, abortion and gun violence ― all issues where Harris has a substantial lead over Trump with young voters.

Kamarck highlighted abortion in particular. “You can’t dismiss abortion,” she said. “It is the issue that has gotten women of all ages, but particularly young women, interested in politics and realizing that they have a stake in politics. I think that’s the first lesson, is if you have a stake in something in politics, then you get interested in elections.” EMILY’s List also notes that abortion has been a driving issue in motivating young women voters.

Kiesa, though, cautioned that what CIRCLE has seen in its surveys is less concrete.

“Across the board, with one exception, the cost of living and inflation was the number one issue” for young voters, regardless of race or gender, she said. “The only exception to that was Black men, who said jobs that pay a living wage.”

Advertisement

“People did not rank, even young women did not rank, expanding access to abortion reproductive care in their top three,” she noted.

Young women, though, are more likely than young men to be involved in liberal-leaning social movements like Black Lives Matter, #MeToo, environmental activism and gun violence prevention. Particularly involved are young women of color, who Kiesa notes have taken on “significant” leadership in activism work.

“Younger Americans are simply more accepting of diversity, whether it’s racial, whether it’s gay and lesbian and queer, or whatever,” Kamarck said.

Annie Wu Henry is a political and digital strategist who has worked with multiple Democratic campaigns. She also works on a volunteer basis as the campaign manager for Swifties4Kamala, a coalition of Swift fans pushing to get Harris elected president. At 28, she is right smack in the “youth” age group herself. She says the issues people bring to the coalition are diverse.

“There are many folks who are large advocates for things like abortion access, and reproductive freedoms and rights. There are many folks that are passionate about things like climate change or gun control,” Henry said. “There are many folks who are passionate about affordable housing and disability access. We have Swifties who are passionate about things across the [gamut], or multiple things at once.”

Advertisement

She notes that Swifties4Kamala, which has some 3,700 volunteers and says it has raised $150,000 for the Harris campaign, is not a monolith in any respect, despite the fact that Swift’s fan base is heavily perceived as young and female. (In fact, one of the co-founders is a trans man.)

“It’s becoming more and more apparent that everything is political, and for so many folks, for women, for queer people, for people of color, for people whose identities span multiple of those things, I think our existence is political,” said Henry. And people are involved: She says that as of late October, the movement has made more than 370,000 phone calls and sent 5.5 million texts to advocate for Harris. “I think we’re seeing the politicization of our bodies, the politicization of what we should or should not be doing in society, the different discourse of ‘childless cat women’ and how that’s unacceptable.”

Kamarck thinks the shift is just as much about Republicans turning young female voters off as it is about Democrats appealing to them.

“It used to be that one of the reasons suburban women voted Republican ― or women in corporate America voted Republican ― [was] when we fought elections on things like taxation, things like freedom from too much regulation, et cetera,” she said.

“Suddenly we’re not talking about those things anymore,” she said. “We’re talking about ‘Women should have a lot of babies,’ and ‘If they’re pregnant, they should be forced to have a child that they don’t want,’ et cetera. Suddenly it’s a different conversation.”

Advertisement

Saad notes that it’s impossible to point to direct causes and effects, or to zero in on one thing or another as the One True Reason. But she adds that 2015 seems to be a clear pivot point, citing a few big things that happened around that time.

“Perhaps the Obergefell decision, or the prominence around gay marriage and gay rights at a time when so many more young women are coming out as LGBT, could be a factor,” Saad said. Or there’s the fact that women who are ages 18 to 29 now were largely children and teens nine years ago, and have grown up in a different political climate.

“Perhaps the start of the 2016 election — you have Hillary Clinton running, so now you have a very prominent female leader at the same time you have Trump, and however they would have reacted to him early on in that process,” she said. “Those are all very reasonable events to point to on the timeline as things that could have been formative.”

Kamarck also nodded to the idea of women’s visibility on the political stage.

“Suddenly you have a female candidate who’s close to the presidency, and the second one in the lifetime of most young women. Although they might have been kids when Hillary ran,” she said. “I think that in the way that Obama’s presidency sort of crystallized a lot of racism that was under the surface, I think this is crystallizing a lot of feelings about the role of women in society, and bringing a lot of those up.”

“Young women were raised in a society where they were continually taught they could do anything,” she added. “And then to have a certain part of the political world saying, ‘Oh, no, we really think it’s important that you stay home and have children.’ It’s kind of a slap in the face.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Republicans running for Senate ducked and dodged when pressed about abortion access in debates across the country this month, continuing to struggle with a key electoral liability that threatens to deny their party both control of Congress and the White House in November.

The calculated effort to soften the GOP’s image on the hot-button issue began soon after the Supreme Court repealed Roe v. Wade, a historic decision that fueled a backlash against the party at the ballot box, costing Republicans critical seats in the 2022 midterm elections.

Advertisement

Since then, many Republicans have misrepresented or outright lied to voters about their record, evading questions about extreme abortion bans currently on the books in states across the country.

Last week, for example, conservative Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), in a debate with his Democratic challenger, Rep. Colin Allred, repeatedly avoided giving a direct answer to questions about his position on exceptions to abortion bans for cases of rape and incest.

“Why do you keep asking me that?” Cruz asked the moderator at one point after he failed to answer the question, before quickly pivoting to his support for states setting their own laws.

Nearly 20 states have severe or near-total abortion bans in place, some without exceptions for rape, incest and the life of the mother, leading to devastating consequences for many women, including in Texas. Women have been denied care and left to bleed out in hospital parking lots or were forced to travel out of state for care.

Advertisement

Advocating for states to make their own decisions on abortion, as the Supreme Court held, necessarily means embracing the idea that some states might adopt abortion restrictions without exceptions.

GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump, who has repeatedly boasted about his role in reversing federal abortion protections, has also struggled with questions about extreme state abortion bans. After initially criticizing his home state of Florida’s six-week abortion ban last month, he announced that he would vote against a ballot measure seeking to repeal it.

“The people are deciding, and in many ways, it’s a beautiful thing to watch,” Trump said during an interview with Fox News host Sean Hannity last month.

In Nevada, a majority pro-choice state where abortion is legal up to 24 weeks, Republican Senate candidate Sam Brown similarly glided over his past support for abortion restrictions without exceptions for rape or incest during a debate with Nevada Democratic Sen. Jacky Rosen over the weekend. Brown, a businessman and U.S. Army veteran, said he now supports those exceptions, pledging not to back a national abortion ban that Democrats fear is coming in the future.

“I would not support a national abortion ban,” Brown said. “I would not appreciate when people lead with deception on this issue.”

Advertisement

Rosen, meanwhile, warned that Brown and other Republicans are hiding their positions on the issue to get elected in November.

“He has a decade-long record saying he’s against any exceptions on abortion even in case[s] of rape or incest,” the senator said of her opponent during the debate over the weekend. “If you don’t believe me, I’ve got some ocean-front property on Las Vegas Boulevard to sell you.”

In Pennsylvania, another critical battleground state, Republican Senate candidate Dave McCormick borrowed language Democrats typically use when talking about women’s reproductive rights — namely, keeping unelected officials out of the equation — during his debate with Sen. Bob Casey (D-Pa.) last week.

“Courts shouldn’t decide, judges shouldn’t decide, people should decide,” McCormick said of abortion limits. He added: “And there’s very different views across states. So I believe it’s a state’s rights issue.”

In 2022, however, McCormick touted his staunch commitment to opposing abortion before the Supreme Court’s ruling repealing Roe v. Wade. Asked at a GOP primary debate that year if he would support exceptions, he said he believed in them in “very rare instances” when a woman’s life was at risk.

Advertisement

But it’s not just newcomers seeking political office who are now presenting themselves to voters as moderates on abortion. Mike Rogers, a former Michigan congressman of 14 years who is now running for Senate, for example, tried to distance himself from his lengthy record of voting for abortion restrictions during his debate with Michigan Rep. Elissa Slotkin, the Democratic nominee in the race.

Rep. Elissa Slotkin (D) and Rep. Mike Rogers (R) debate for the open Michigan U.S. Senate seat on Oct. 14, 2024. Mandi Wright/Detroit Free Press via AP, Pool

After Rogers pledged to uphold Michigan law on abortion, which allows the procedure up until 24 weeks into a pregnancy, Slotkin called him out for his past record.

“He’s put his finger in the wind and says, ‘Now I can’t win if I don’t look good on this issue,’” Slotkin said last week. “So he’s changed 30 years of being unilaterally pro-life, of never breaking once with his partly on this issue. It’s not a talking point to women. It is our lives, it is whether we bleed to death in a parking lot. It’s who and when gets to decide when we have a family.”

She added: “Do not trust him.”

Abortion is one issue where Democrats, who have struggled to combat voter perceptions of the economy and immigration, hold a political advantage.

Advertisement

Support for legal abortion has risen since the Supreme Court’s ruling repealing Roe v. Wade, and more people think their state should generally allow a person to obtain an abortion for any reason, according to a poll from The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.

The big question in this election is whether abortion will play as big a role as it did in the 2022 midterms, or whether voters choose to prioritize other issues.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee did not return a request for comment.

Tommy Garcia, a spokesperson for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, said GOP Senate candidates “have shown voters how out-of-touch they are on one of the defining issues of this election: a woman’s right to make her own health care decisions.”
Vice President Kamala Harris speaks during a moderated conversation with former Rep. Liz Cheney(R-Wyo.) in Brookfield, Wisconsin, on Monday. KAMIL KRZACZYNSKI/Getty Images

BROOKFIELD, Wis. ― Vice President Kamala Harris brought her swing-state tour with former Republican Rep. Liz Cheney and conservative Wisconsin radio host Charlie Sykes to the traditional heart of Wisconsin conservatism in suburban Waukesha County on Monday night.

It was the third and final conversation-style event between Harris and Cheney ― moderated by Sykes ― on Monday. The earlier events were in the Philadelphia and Detroit suburbs, respectively.

Advertisement

But Waukesha County, which propelled Republican Scott Walker to the governorship in 2010, ushering in a period of right-wing ascendancy, was a fitting final location for a presidential campaign that is aggressively courting moderate Republicans and independents ― the kind cut from the same cloth as Cheney and Sykes ― to keep former President Donald Trump out of the White House. From 2016 to 2020, the affluent county, still a GOP stronghold, swung about six points toward the Democratic presidential nominee.

In keeping with the goal of moving the suburban needle further still, Harris, Cheney and Sykes spent the bulk of their time on areas of agreement: Trump’s disrespect for cornerstone American institutions like free and fair elections, his threat to the U.S.-led liberal order in the world, and his indecent character.

Sykes, an anti-Trump conservative from the Milwaukee suburbs who formally endorsed Harris on Monday, began the event with an election nerd joke about the event taking place in “crucial Waukesha County.”

He then asked Harris to explain why she was asking Republicans to forsake their party, and almost certainly a lot of their policy beliefs, to cast a vote for her.

Advertisement

“We love our country, and we believe in the foundational principles that are at stake in this election,” Harris said. “There is more we have in common than what separates us when we think about what is at stake in terms of our democracy, rule of law, the Constitution of the United States, national security, the standing of our country in the context of the world ― all of that is at stake.”

Cheney, who also held her first rally alongside Harris in Ripon, Wisconsin, earlier this month, won her place at Harris’ side thanks to her own personal sacrifice because of her principled stand against Trump. She lost her Republican primary in Wyoming in 2022 because of her vote to impeach Trump following the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol, and subsequent co-chairing of the special committee to investigate Trump’s role in the events of that day.

“If you wouldn’t hire somebody to babysit your kids, then you shouldn’t make that guy the president of the United States.” - Former Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.)

In making her case to Republican voters to cross the aisle, Cheney invoked the example of former Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee in 2000 who conceded the race to President George W. Bush after the Supreme Court ordered a halt in vote counting, as a contrast with Trump, who refused to do the same in 2020.

“You don’t have to take my word for it, but look at what people closest to Donald Trump are saying about him,” said Cheney, noting how many former senior officials and aides have attested to his refusal to accept the election results, plan to overturn them, and indifference as his supporters besieged the Capitol. “We’ve never faced a threat like this before, and I think it’s so important for people to realize this republic only survives if we protect it, and that means putting partisan politics aside and standing up for the Constitution and for what’s right and loving our country.”

Advertisement

A self-described “pro-life” opponent of abortion rights, Cheney already made news earlier on Monday when she added the excesses of anti-abortion states to the list of her concerns about another Trump presidency.

She repeated that thought on Monday night, singling out for condemnation Texas’ attempts to gain access to women’s medical records and expressing dismay about the instances of pregnant women who have died unnecessarily because medical professionals feared the legal exposure that would come from terminating a pregnancy.

“It’s crucially important for us to find ways to have the federal government play a role and protect women from some of the worst harms that we’re seeing,” Cheney said.

Cheney also delivered the line of the night in a response to a question from Dan Voboril, an undecided and retired school teacher, who wanted to know how to convince people like him and his conservative siblings that Trump will worsen the “toxicity” in American culture.

Harris listens as former Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) speaks about how patriotic duty compelled her to back Harris' candidacy. KAMIL KRZACZYNSKI via Getty Images

Advertisement

“If you wouldn’t hire somebody to babysit your kids, then you shouldn’t make that guy the president of the United States,” she said, prompting whoops of laughter and applause from the crowd.

Not everyone in the Democratic coalition is pleased to see Cheney ― or her father, former Vice President Dick Cheney ― campaigning for Harris. The Cheneys are deeply hawkish proponents of American military interventionism; Dick Cheney was an architect of the Iraq War, which progressives consider the quintessential example of American hubris, disregard for human life, and even imperialism.

The debate over the Democratic Party’s foreign policy found its way into the hall on Monday night, when a lone heckler from the audience shouted out a critical question about Harris’ approach to the Israel-Hamas war in Gaza. “What about Gaza?” the attendee yelled out toward the beginning of the forum.

The response of those in the room mirrored how Harris has handled those dissenting voices to her left on foreign policy: by ignoring or outright flouting them. The audience applauded to drown out the man’s voice until he was removed from the theater by event staff.

Harris, unfazed, reveled in the opportunity to tout her and Cheney’s shared belief in the fundamentally noble nature of the U.S. security state and extol its mission to help Ukraine fend off the Russian invasion.

Advertisement

Referring to Trump’s vague promises to end the Russia-Ukraine war through negotiation, Harris said, “I don’t think we, as Americans, think that the president of the United States should solve an issue like that through surrender.”

The polls have tightened in Wisconsin to the point where Harris is now barely leading in the state. It’s unclear whether Monday night’s event will make a difference for Harris in the college-educated suburbs where she likely must maintain or exceed President Joe Biden’s performance to offset Trump’s inroads with non-college voters of all races.

“Everything about him was against what we used to believe. And I just couldn’t go along with it.” - Cathy Waller, former executive director, Republican Party of Waukesha County

But while many of the attendees were longtime Democrats who were simply eager to hear the vice president up close, a number of people in the audience had only begun abandoning the GOP in 2016 or in the intervening years.

Cathy Waller, the former executive director of the Republican Party of Waukesha County, retired after Trump’s win in 2016. The outcome revolted her, prompting her to support Democrats for the presidency ― and downballot, since congressional Republicans are loyal to Trump.

Advertisement

She finds Trump’s rhetoric about immigrants, and decision to separate the families of undocumented immigrants, especially troubling.

“Everything about him was against what we used to believe,” Waller said. “And I just couldn’t go along with it.”

For Penny Miller, a real estate agent who drove down to the event with friends from Neenah, Wisconsin, the process had been slower. She voted for Trump twice due to what she hoped he would do as a business person, to tame the national debt and get the country’s budget in order.

Miller eventually got sick of Trump “making fun of people” and “not listening,” and believes he did not stabilize the country’s finances.

Miller’s friend from Waukesha County, who withheld her name for privacy, never voted for Trump, but expressed some disappointment that Harris had not done more that evening to address the most common reasons she hears from people about why they aren’t voting for Harris: the economy ― really, inflation ― and the chaos that erupted on the U.S.-Mexico border due to a surge in the number of asylum seekers.

Advertisement
Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump speaks during a campaign rally at Arnold Palmer Regional Airport on Saturday in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. Evan Vucci via Associated Press

WASHINGTON ― A psychiatrist who helped craft the 1973 “Goldwater rule” that has kept many mental health professionals from opining on Donald Trump for nearly a decade said that it was not intended as a hard-and-fast prohibition, and that if he were Trump’s doctor, he would order a full battery of tests to determine the cause of what he believes could be the former president’s dementia.

“He seems to be progressively cognitively impaired,” said Allen Dyer, a retired George Washington University psychiatry professor.

Advertisement

Dyer said Trump’s recent behavior warrants medical evaluation, like his apparent inability to remain focused on a single topic or string together complete sentences, for example, or his confusing of people, as he has repeatedly done with former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley. And more recently, his loss of interest in taking questions at his own campaign event, followed by a demand that his staff play some of his favorite songs while he stood onstage and swayed to the music.

“I find it concerning that he doesn’t complete his sentences, seems to lose track of the question he is trying to answer, or avoid, and that one thought doesn’t lead to another, but appears to veer tangentially off track,” Dyer said.

Trump’s campaign did not respond to HuffPost queries about whether Trump has had a recent cognitive examination, beyond the one he continues to boast about having “aced” that he said he took while he was president.

Trump has refused to release any medical records heading into next month’s election, even though he would be, were he to win, the oldest president to take the oath of office. On Sunday, at a campaign event in Pennsylvania, he denied being close to 80 years old or having any cognitive issues.

Advertisement

“I’m not 80, and I’m not that close to 80,” said Trump, who is 20 months away from turning 80. “I’ve done cognitive tests. I’ve done them twice, and I aced both of them, and the doctor in one case said, ‘I’ve never seen anybody ace them.’”

Dyer and other psychiatrists, though, said that test, often used as an initial screening tool which Trump took nearly seven years ago, is not helpful in assessing his current condition.

“That assessment is given to potential nursing home patients to decide which wing to assign them to, not to someone you want to hire, let alone be president,” said Andrew Smolar, a Pennsylvania psychiatrist who has had numerous patients of Trump’s age and apparent condition.

Smolar is among the 440 and counting health care professionals supporting Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris who warn that Trump’s current condition is worrisome and call on him to release his medical records.

“Trump is falling concerningly short of any standard of fitness for office and displaying alarming characteristics of declining acuity,” they wrote in an Oct. 13 open letter. “As we saw in the first presidential debate, Trump is displaying irrationality and irritability. Notably, he ranted about migrants eating people’s cats and dogs. This was widely debunked as untrue. In the limited opportunities we can examine his behavior, he’s providing a deeply concerning snapshot.”

Advertisement

Roots In The 1964 Election

As a young doctor, Dyer was among the six members of the American Psychiatric Association’s ethics committee charged in 1973 with developing guidance for psychiatrists regarding their opinions when it came to political figures. The question resulted from the presidential campaign of 1964, when the magazine “Fact” sent out questionnaires to 12,356 psychiatrists all over the country asking if they thought Arizona Republican Sen. Barry Goldwater was mentally competent to be president. The magazine wrote an article using the 2,417 responses. Among the views they shared from respondents was that Goldwater was a “latent homosexual,” that he “hated and feared his wife,” and that he was conflicted because his father was Jewish and his mother a Protestant.

Goldwater sued Fact for libel, and in 1968 won the lawsuit and an award of $75,000 against the magazine, which had already gone out of business by then.

The APA believed the episode tarnished the reputation of psychiatrists generally and worked to make sure it wouldn’t happen again. They tasked the ethics committee to craft language to add to its “Principles of Medical Ethics With Annotations Especially Applicable to Psychiatry.” The result was a ban against offering diagnoses and “professional opinions” about people whom they had not personally examined.

In the coming decades, the new language did not really matter as both major parties nominated candidates who spoke and acted within the mainstream of American political discourse. The only time a presidential candidate’s mental health was questioned was by supporters of George W. Bush in the 2000 primary, when they spread rumors that rival John McCain’s nearly six years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam had scarred him psychologically.

That respite ended in 2016, when Republicans nominated a conspiracy theorist and habitual liar who, even at age 70, displayed symptoms of narcissistic personality disorder as laid out in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

Advertisement

After he was elected, some psychiatrists and psychologists began warning about Trump’s behavior, predicting that it would get even worse, and called for his removal under the Constitution’s 25th Amendment. And those doctors and therapists, in turn, were often criticized for violating the Goldwater Rule.

Bandy Lee, a professor of psychiatry at Yale University, was fired after editing and contributing to the book “The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 27 Psychiatrists and Mental Health Professionals Assess a President.”

In a 2018 article in the British Journal of Psychiatry, John Gartner, a Maryland psychologist and contributor to Lee’s book, wrote that gagging mental health professionals made it impossible for those who best understand Trump’s behavior to speak out about it.

“Blindly following Goldwater legalistically paints us into a logical corner ― a reductio ad absurdum. Since it appears unlikely that Trump will ever voluntarily consent to a psychiatric interview, the truth about his psychiatric state becomes an unknowable mystery, or simply a matter of opinion, like the existence of God,” Gartner wrote. “No matter how grossly impaired Trump may be, or becomes, no matter how overwhelming the evidence, reality will always be unknowable, even if the emperor clearly has no sanity.”

Both Gartner and Lee criticized the APA’s 2017 guidance that appears to ban psychiatrists from offering any opinion at all about someone whom they have not personally evaluated and whose permission they have not received to speak publicly.

Advertisement

“I never objected to the original Goldwater rule, and kept with it,” Lee said. “It was its perversion in March 2017 I objected to, and what we see today is the result.”

In a written statement to HuffPost, the APA said it “did not expand” the scope of the Goldwater standard.

Dyer, who believes he is the last member of the original 1973 ethics committee who is still alive, wondered in a 2020 article in the Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association whether the APA had gone too far in its revision.

“With regard to Goldwater and Trump, way down deep there is general agreement that public statements should be made carefully and cautiously, but also way down deep there is concern and alarm about Trump’s instincts, desires, behavior, and mental status,” Dyer wrote. “Professionals for good reason try to remain above politics, to hold principle above expediency. I hope at the end of the day, in the face of a president who respects none of that, we will not regret saying too little.”

‘Increasingly Unstable And Unhinged’

Ironically, for the entirety of Democrat Joe Biden’s presidency, it was Trump who was accusing the man who had beaten him in the 2020 election of being cognitively impaired.

Advertisement

“He must be insane, or suffering from late-stage dementia!” Trump wrote in a social media post on Sept. 2, 2022.

“I think he should take a cognitive test like I did,” he said on June 15 this year, just before mixing up the name of his White House doctor, Ronny Jackson, and the Republican senator from Wisconsin, Ron Johnson.

But with top Democrats echoing concerns about Biden and his ability to run an exhausting campaign at 81 years of age, Biden abandoned his reelection and endorsed his vice president, Kamala Harris, more than two decades his junior.

And now it is Trump’s words and behavior that is drawing questions about his cognitive ability, particularly after a rash of incidents and decisions in recent months that he and his campaign are left trying to explain.

He has frequently claimed that he defeated former President Barack Obama in the 2016 election, rather than his actual Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton. Likewise he has confused Obama with Biden. During his testimony in a civil fraud trial against him last year, he claimed that he was conducting important foreign policy work regarding China and Russia in 2021 ― when in reality he was president in 2021 for just three weeks, spanning his coup attempt and its aftermath. Trump acknowledged during further questioning that he was not president during the time period under discussion.

Advertisement

During his rallies and interviews he goes on long tangents unconnected to the topic at hand, most famously, perhaps, in a response to a question about child care costs at the Economic Club of New York, where instead he went on and on about tariffs and oil drilling. Frequently he talks about the fictional serial killer Hannibal Lecter or his preference for being eaten by a shark rather than getting electrocuted by a boat battery.

Trump, in response to news accounts that describe his hour-and-a-half speeches as “rambling,” has said that his stories are a sign of “genius” and has come to call what he does ― going from one topic to another and eventually returning to the original one ― “the weave.”

Trump has started spreading completely fictional conspiracy theories to boost his campaign, from the idea that Haitian migrants were eating pets to a claim that Biden and Harris were intentionally mismanaging the response to Hurricane Helene. Last week, Trump even claimed in an interview that neither Biden nor Harris was running the government.

“It’s a committee of people, and they might not even know who the committee is,” Trump said. “They may not even know themselves — does that make sense? It’s a group of people that are in different levels of D.C.”

Harris has started to make Trump’s mental miscues a part of her own campaign remarks, questioning whether Trump has the mental capacity for the job, leaving aside his felony conviction and multiple outstanding felony charges based on his coup attempt.

Advertisement

“He’s becoming increasingly unstable and unhinged,” she told reporters in Detroit on Saturday. “The American people are seeing it, witnessing it in real time.”

She added a few hours later at a rally in Atlanta: “Now, he’s ducking debates and canceling interviews because of exhaustion. And when he does answer a question or speak at a rally, have you noticed he tends to go off script and ramble? And generally for the life of him cannot finish a thought. And he has called it ‘the weave.’ But I think we here would call it nonsense.”

To Dyer, Smolar and others, Trump’s behavior in his public remarks are ticking off the boxes on the list of symptoms warning of dementia.

Even his tendency to drop obscenities into his public remarks of late ― he used the phrase “I don’t give a shit” speaking at a Catholic Church fundraising event last week and called Harris a “shit vice president” in a Saturday rally in Pennsylvania, where he also spoke of the size of the late golf legend Arnold Palmer’s penis ― suggests “disinhibition,” another sign that his condition is worsening, Dyer said.

He added that if Trump has not yet gotten professional help for whatever is causing these and other behaviors, he should, for his own sake, so that an appropriate treatment could be started.

Advertisement

“I would want to do lab studies, imaging studies, and a battery of psychological tests,” Dyer said. “One would want to know if this is dementia and decreased cognitive function.”
As a rule, public schools and K-12 education tend not to be key issues in presidential elections for an obvious reason: Most policymaking related to schools happens at the local and state levels.

But the rules change when a major-party presidential nominee threatens — over and over again — to defund school districts that he disagrees with.

Donald Trump visited a barbershop in the Bronx with Fox News’ Lawrence Jones, and a voter asked the former president for his ideas about improving education. After rambling a bit about the Department of Education, the Republican got to the heart of his vision:

No transgender, no operations, you know they take your kid. There are some places, your boy leaves the school, comes back a girl, OK? Without parental consent. What is that all about? ... Can you imagine, without parental consent? And first, when I was told that was actually happening, I said, ‘You know, it’s an exaggeration.’ No, it happens. It happens. There are areas where it happens.

Right off the bat, it’s important to emphasize that Trump’s claims were utterly bonkers. There are no schools in the United States — literally, not one — performing transgender surgeries. If the GOP nominee genuinely believes “there are areas” where this happens, he’s become completely unfamiliar with daily life in his own country.

What’s more, the local voter in New York asked a fair question about improving schools, and Trump answered by pointing to a problem that only exists in his imagination. That’s not exactly ideal.

But even if we put aside these relevant details, let’s also not overlook the fact that Trump has talked about defunding schools that recognize transgender students.

We’re not talking about surgical procedures; we’re talking about the possibility of a Republican White House pushing to defund local schools that recognize students based on their preferred gender identity.

Meanwhile, last week, Trump also appeared on Fox News and was asked about school districts that teach American history in ways conservatives don’t like. “Then we don’t send them money,” the former president quickly replied.

In case that wasn’t quite enough, Trump has also spent most of the year declaring, at one campaign rally after another, “I will not give one penny to any school that has a vaccine mandate.”

When Trump first started peddling this vow, there was some discussion about whether he was referring specifically to Covid vaccine mandates or all vaccine mandates, but the presumptive GOP nominee, at least publicly, has ignored the distinction. What’s more, in some instances, Trump has said his policy would apply to all public education, “from kindergarten through college.”

Or put another way, a second Trump administration — if the candidate’s promises are to be believed — would be prepared to cut federal support from every public school district in the United States, as well as most institutions of higher learning. (Remember, all 50 states require vaccinations for students.)

So, taken together, Trump is prepared to cut funding to schools that recognize transgender students, schools that teach versions of history that bother him, and/or schools that try to prevent the spread of communicable diseases.

Education hasn’t been much of a 2024 campaign issue. With two weeks remaining, perhaps that should change.
Vivek Ramaswamy, the biotech entrepreneur who ran for president earlier this year and is now a frequent pro-Donald Trump guest on Fox News, was greeted like a celebrity by the crowd at Madison Square Garden.

"I don’t follow the polls. I don’t follow the pundits. But I follow the energy," Ramaswamy said. "And this does not feel like second-place energy here tonight!"

Ramaswamy went on to recall a recent conversation with a billionaire friend who questioned why the Trump campaign would be holding a rally in solid blue New York rather than a swing state.

Ramaswamy said he replied, "Welcome to 2024, New York is a swing state!"

Ramaswamy used the remainder of his remarks to hit themes that were staples of his stump speech as a failed presidential candidate: the wrongheadedness of "identity politics" and affirmative action, the need to crack down on illegal immigration while respecting legal immigrants like his parents, and the distinction between supporting same-sex marriage, which he supports, and transgender rights like equity in competitive sports and access to transitional procedures for minors.

"Identity politics never works in America. When you select somebody based on their race and their gender, it always ends up being a disaster," he said. "And I’m actually talking about Tim Walz this time! It goes both ways."
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz usually slips a few zingers into his remarks at campaign rallies around the country.

But the Democratic nominee for vice president came to Madison, Wisconsin, on Tuesday with a particularly fiery spirit, ripping into former President Donald Trump and the right-wing billionaire tech CEO Elon Musk with a series of choice words.

Advertisement

Up first in the line of attack was Trump, as Walz mocked him for staging a campaign stunt at a Pennsylvania McDonald’s. He quipped that the location made Trump appear “much more like Ronald McDonald than the clown that he actually is.”

“And Ron wears less makeup,” Walz added. He theorized that Trump, who has been “forgetting things lately,” may have “mixed up his weekends and thought it was Halloween already.”

“Everything about this guy is fake. Everything he does is fake,” Walz went on. “Next, he’s gonna be telling you he’s a cop and a construction worker because he dances to the Village People.”

On Sunday, Trump manned the deep fryer and served up fries to someone at the drive-thru window as a pack of photographers outside captured the moment. The restaurant had been shut down for the event, which had spiraled out of Trump’s repeated insistence that Vice President Kamala Harris had lied about working at McDonald’s during a summer home from college. (There is no evidence to suggest she lied.)

Advertisement

“Look, there’s something not just nuts, but cruel, about a billionaire using people’s livelihoods as a political prop,” Walz said of Trump. “His agenda lets big corporations not pay people for overtime and diminishes those very people he was cosplaying as.”

Walz also took aim at Trump’s reported exhaustion, saying, “I can promise you he’s not as exhausted as the American people are of him.”

He took a moment to skewer Trump’s term for the meandering, hard-to-follow responses he gives in interviews and during the off-the-cuff portions of his campaign rallies. Trump calls his rhetorical style “the weave,” claiming that he always ends up back on track.

“Donald, come on,” Walz joked. “We know there’s only one weave that you know anything about.”

He later turned to Musk, joking that the controversial tech CEO had sidelined Trump’s running mate, Sen. JD Vance (R-Ohio). Musk’s involvement in Trump’s campaign has indeed ramped up from his first appearance onstage in Butler, Pennsylvania, earlier this month; in recent days he began handing out $1 million checks to randomly selected voters at Trump’s rallies.

“Look, Elon’s on that stage, jumpin’ around, skipping like a dipshit,” Walz said, prompting cheers.

Recalling how Trump suggested he would nominate Musk to a top-tier position in his administration, Walz pointed out that could put Musk in charge of policies that affect his various companies.

Advertisement

“So in other words, Donald Trump, in front of the eyes of the American public, is promising corruption,” Walz said. “I don’t believe he’ll keep many promises, but he’ll keep that one. I guarantee he’ll keep that one.”

Walz’s tone shifted as he praised Harris, touching on her proposals to improve Medicare, encourage small business startups and ease the process of buying a home.

But soon he turned back to Trump.

He warned that the former president has said he would use the military to, in Walz’s words, “go after people who disagree with his idiotic ideas,” and that Trump declined the chance to take back his alarming suggestion.

Walz said that Vance defended his running mate by saying Trump simply spoke “from the heart.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
is a senior politics correspondent at Vox, covering the White House, elections, and political scandals and investigations. He’s worked at Vox since the site’s launch in 2014, and before that, he worked as a research assistant at the New Yorker’s Washington, DC, bureau.

The vibes about who will win the 2024 presidential election may have shifted — but with barely more than two weeks until Election Day, the polls are as inconclusive as they’ve ever been.

Polling averages show a contest in which Kamala Harris and Donald Trump are almost tied in most key swing states. And while Trump’s polling has improved slightly in the past few weeks, it hasn’t been enough to give him a clear edge. At least not yet.

On average, Trump holds a small edge, generally between 1 and 2 points, in Arizona, Georgia, and North Carolina. To win the presidency, though, he will need to breach the “blue wall” by winning one of Michigan, Pennsylvania, or Wisconsin. As of midday Monday, those states are still, on average, about tied.

There hasn’t been a ton of high-quality swing-state polling in recent weeks, and the best-regarded pollsters will likely all release new numbers closer to the end of the campaign. Once they do, we could get a better sense of where the race stands.

If polling averages continue to show an extremely close race after a final infusion of high-quality polls, it will only heighten the uncertainty about what will happen. Polling errors — where one candidate or party is systematically underestimated — of the magnitude of a few points are common.

The polls could be underestimating Trump again, as they did in swing states in 2016 and 2020. Alternatively, perhaps pollsters have corrected for their previous bias — or even overcorrected, risking an error that underestimates Harris. We simply won’t know until the votes are counted.

What the polls show in the swing states

To recap: There are seven swing states that will very likely determine the outcome of the election (with every other state expected to go solidly for either Trump or Harris). Listed in order of electoral votes, they are:

Pennsylvania (19 electoral votes)

North Carolina and Georgia (16 electoral votes each)

Michigan (15 electoral votes)

Arizona (11 electoral votes)

Wisconsin (10 electoral votes)

Nevada (6 electoral votes)

If Harris can pick up 44 electoral votes in these swing states, she’ll win the presidency. Trump would need 51 electoral votes from these same states to win. The polls say these swing states are — brace yourself — very close!

Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Michigan, Nevada, and North Carolina all are almost exactly tied in the New York Times’s polling averages, which show Trump up in Georgia by 1 and Arizona by 2. Nate Silver’s polling averages have similar results.

There’s a slightly more rosy story for Harris in the Washington Post’s averages, which show her up by 2 in Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin. On the other hand, the RealClearPolitics averages show Trump leading by 2 points or less in all the swing states.

But these differences are hair-splitting. None of these results are lopsided enough to instill any real confidence about which way the outcome will go.

Vibes aren’t worth much either

The vibes, on the other hand, point more clearly in one direction: Among Democrats, there’s been increasing trepidation about Harris’s chances, while Republicans sound quite confident in Trump’s.

But the pre-election vibes would have told you that the GOP was headed for a landslide victory in 2022, that Biden was going to win overwhelmingly (rather than very narrowly) in 2020, and that Trump had no chance of winning in 2016. These sorts of intangible hunches and guesses just aren’t worth much.

Some point to purported clues about the outcome in non-polling metrics, like early voting numbers or prediction markets. But early voting numbers are a notoriously bad indicator of what will happen on Election Day. Prediction markets generally reflect conventional wisdom — and this year in particular, they may be skewed by a few big-betting Trump fans.

Once we know the result, hindsight will be 20/20. We can all look back for the clues that were purportedly hidden in plain sight, as we tell ourselves stories about how the outcome was fated all along. For now, though, the race is simply too close to call.

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
Democrats are currently focused on the fight against Donald Trump. But quietly, factions within the party are preparing contingency plans for a different battle: the one over how to interpret a Kamala Harris loss.

Polls of the 2024 election show the closest presidential race in modern memory. For Harris, defeat is roughly as likely as victory. The former outcome is sure to trigger a fierce intra-Democratic debate over what the party should learn from losing the White House (twice) to an unpopular demagogue.

It’s impossible to say with absolute certainty which — if any — of these theories would become conventional wisdom in the event of a second Trump victory.

Often, when a party suffers an electoral rebuke, the faction that led it into the wilderness loses influence within the coalition. After Hillary Clinton’s loss in 2016, the Democratic Party became more progressive, ceding influence to some of her left-wing critics.

On the other hand, progressives wielded tremendous influence over economic policy in the Biden White House. And Harris is only five years removed from campaigning as a proponent of Medicare-for-all and the Green New Deal — issue positions that Trump’s team has relentlessly highlighted. What’s more, the fact that Harris secured the Democratic nomination without competing in a primary makes the question of who within the party owns her success or failure even more ambiguous.

All this said, I suspect anyone who believes a Harris defeat would strengthen the party’s progressive wing is kidding themselves. On the contrary, I think Trump’s election would push the Democrats rightward or at least consolidate the moderate turn that the party has already taken.

From my perspective, this would not be a happy development. Under Biden, the Democratic Party’s positioning on many issues has been to the right of my own preferences. I believe the United States would be best served by a more generous social welfare state, higher levels of immigration, and a foreign policy that shows less tolerance for the human rights violations of US allies. But the political case for some degree of moderation in the wake of a Harris loss will be plausible. And I believe that case will win out for three reasons:

First, the unusual conditions that led Democrats to move left after their first loss to Trump no longer hold.

Second, one of progressives’ perennial arguments against the political necessity of moderation — that Democrats can mobilize low-propensity young and nonwhite voters through bold progressivism — has grown less credible over the past eight years.

Finally, a Trump victory would almost certainly lead to a full extension of his 2017 tax cuts — and, if the Republican gets his way, new reductions in corporations’ tax liabilities. This would swell the federal deficit, thereby rendering moderate Democrats more averse to ambitious new social welfare spending, such as that proposed by Biden during his first year in office.

This is not to say that a Harris loss would cause Democrats to re-embrace the across-the-board centrism of Bill Clinton’s second term. Rather, Democrats would likely remain staunchly progressive in areas where left-wing positioning has little political cost.

But losing a second election to an undisciplined reactionary probably won’t convince Democrats that Biden and Harris were insufficiently left-wing on immigration, criminal justice, or fiscal policy. A second Trump victory would therefore probably mean not only a more conservative federal government, but also, in all likelihood, a more moderate Democratic Party.

We’re not in 2017 anymore

The last time Democrats lost to Trump, they proceeded to move left: Bernie Sanders’s Medicare-for-all bill gained sponsors in Congress, nearly every Democrat with presidential ambitions embraced more progressive issue positions, and the party ultimately nominated a candidate with a more left-wing platform than Hillary Clinton’s four years earlier.

But should Harris lose in November, this history is unlikely to repeat.

Three factors enabled the Democrats’ progressive pivot after 2016. First, Trump’s victory and Sanders’s strong general election poll numbers briefly threw conventional political wisdom into doubt. Second, Sanders’s surprising strength in the 2016 primary led many Democratic presidential hopefuls to court his constituency. And third, the party knew it would be running against an exceptionally unpopular Republican in 2020.

None of these conditions would hold following a Harris loss.

In 2016, most mainstream commentators understood Trump as an extremist and expected him to lose partly for that reason. After all, the right-wing demagogue praised political violence, called for ethnic discrimination, and promised to imprison his presidential rival. The fact that Trump nevertheless won the presidency naturally invited suspicions that the realm of politically tenable positions was wider than previously thought.

This sense was reinforced by Sanders’s apparent popularity. During the 2016 campaign, polls frequently showed him performing better against Trump than Clinton did. Taken together, Trump and Sanders’s apparent electability suggested that the benefits of moderation may have been greatly exaggerated.

In the intervening years, however, conventional political wisdom regained credibility. Democratic politicos came to appreciate that swing voters did not see Trump the same way they did: Voters saw him in 2016 as the most “moderate” Republican nominee since 1972. This perception wasn’t entirely baseless. Although Trump adopted some far-right positions, he also pulled his party to the left on entitlement spending and trade. At various points in his 2016 campaign, he also offered rhetorical support for center-left positions on Planned Parenthood, LGBTQ rights, and foreign policy.

Meanwhile, Sanders’s poll numbers softened. By 2020, his favorability rating was underwater, with non-college-educated white voters disapproving of him by more than 25 points in some polls. Sanders remained more popular and electorally competitive than socialists were traditionally presumed to be. This likely reflected the popular appeal of many progressive positions, including a $15 minimum wage and support for organized labor. Nevertheless, in many high-quality polls in 2020, Biden performed better against Trump than Sanders did.

The second condition that led Democrats to move left after 2016 was the apparent strength of progressives in presidential primaries. Despite Hillary Clinton’s enormous edge in party support, Sanders still managed to make the 2016 primary highly competitive. In a more open race, it stood to reason that a progressive in Sanders’s mold might have the inside track to the nomination. This led Democratic presidential hopefuls to bid against each other for the left’s support. Ultimately, that progressive fervor influenced even the race’s moderate, Joe Biden.

But Sanders and Elizabeth Warren both put up underwhelming performances in the 2020 primary. Once the party’s moderates unified behind Biden, he won easily. The race’s ultimate lesson was that a majority of Democratic primary voters care more about perceived electability than ideological purity.

Further, if Harris loses — after Trump spent months assailing her for positions she took in 2020 — Democrats will take a second lesson from that primary: Getting into bidding wars for progressive support is electorally damaging. Put these two takeaways together, and the Democrats’ 2028 field following a Harris loss is likely to be more moderate than its 2020 one.

Finally, after 2016, Democrats knew they would be running against an exceptionally unpopular and undisciplined Republican candidate four years later. This made it possible for the party to indulge its activists and advocacy groups while remaining highly competitive in the polls.

Assuming a second Trump presidency doesn’t end the republic, Democrats would face a non-Trump Republican in 2028 for the first time in more than a decade. One shouldn’t put it past conservatives to find an even more repellent standard-bearer, but odds are a post-Trump GOP nominee would be more capable of adhering to a message and avoiding personal scandal than the party’s current leader. And that could force Democrats to exercise greater ideological discipline.

Juicing turnout through bold progressivism is no longer a plausible alternative to placating swing voters

In the wake of a Harris loss, progressives would also lack one weapon they had long possessed in intra-party skirmishes over strategy: a halfway plausible theory of how Democrats can make moderation unnecessary by mobilizing their base.

The idea that Democrats could forgo winning over skeptical swing voters by increasing turnout was long central to progressive political thinking. And it’s not hard to see why: An American who would consider voting Republican, by definition, is one who does not share the progressive movement’s worldview. Such a person might have progressive views on some issues (swing voters often have ideologically heterodox views), but they are unlikely to believe the Democratic Party is insufficiently aligned with the left on all major issues. To the contrary, according to New York Times polling, swing voters are more likely to identify as conservative than liberal. And this is liable to be even more true of those nonpartisan voters who ultimately do cast a ballot for the GOP nominee.

Thus, if Democratic officials conclude that their party must win over some voters who backed Republicans in the last election, then those officials are liable to moderate ideologically, at least on some issues.

In the wake of past defeats, progressives tried to dissuade Democrats from reaching that conclusion by offering an alternative path to a new electoral majority: Instead of placating Republican-curious voters, Democrats could mobilize young and nonwhite voters who already favored their party but hadn’t previously shown up at the polls. Achieving the latter task required championing a bold vision for progressive change.

This pitch always had its flaws. For one, persuading a Republican-leaning voter is twice as valuable as turning out a Democrat: Doing the former not only adds a vote to your party’s column, it subtracts one from your opponent’s tally. For another, evidence that nonvoting people of color were uniformly progressive has never been especially strong.

Still, the idea that mobilization could serve as a substitute for moderation had some plausibility in the 2010s. In the Obama era, Democrats thrived in high-turnout presidential elections while struggling in low-turnout midterms. The demographic groups with the lowest turnout rates — including young and Hispanic voters — were overwhelmingly Democratic.

But two developments have weakened this case in recent years. First, young and nonwhite Americans have become less reliably Democratic, according to the polls. Second, it’s become clear that the subset of young and nonwhite Americans with a low propensity to vote isn’t especially left-wing.

In polls of the 2024 race, Democrats’ margin with young voters has fallen sharply. In some surveys, Trump has opened up a roughly 20-point lead with young men, and he has also made substantial gains with Black and Hispanic voters.

More importantly, it’s become apparent that low-propensity young and nonwhite voters — the typical targets for a progressive mobilization strategy — are particularly open to the Republican message and not particularly liberal.

Nate Cohn of the New York Times first flagged this reality in 2019. In a study of battleground state nonvoters, Cohn found that Biden’s margin over Trump with nonvoting Black respondents was 44 points smaller than his margin with Black voters who turned out in both 2016 and 2018.

Cohn’s analysis also found that young nonvoters who leaned Democratic had more conservative opinions on immigration, health care, and gender than young Democrats who showed up for elections. All in all, Cohn found that nonvoters’ views didn’t differ substantially from those of the electorate at large.

Subsequent polling and election results have lent credence to these findings. In the Biden era, Democrats have performed better in low-turnout special elections than relatively high-turnout presidential and midterm elections. And polls have consistently found Trump performing better with low-propensity voters than reliable ones, a pattern that holds within the nonwhite and young subsets of the electorate.

This doesn’t mean Democrats have nothing to gain from mobilizing low-propensity voters who lean left. Even if nonvoting Black Americans are less Democratic than Black Americans in general, they’re still majority Democratic. To the extent the party can target its supporters — without accidentally mobilizing conservative voters — turnout operations can aid Democratic candidates.

But the fact that nonvoters aren’t overwhelmingly Democratic and that nonvoting Democrats aren’t especially progressive makes it harder to argue that mobilization can serve as a substitute for winning over swing voters, or that moderating is antithetical to increasing Democratic turnout.

For these reasons, progressives would likely have a harder time preventing Democrats from moderating, at least on some issues, after a 2024 defeat than they did after Clinton’s loss in 2016.

Trump’s tax cuts would likely constrain future Democrats’ fiscal ambitions

Harris’s Democratic Party is already less fiscally ambitious than Biden’s was when he took office.

The Democratic nominee still supports a wide range of new social programs, from increased funding for long-term care to universal pre-kindergarten to family and medical leave. But Harris is nevertheless proposing fewer progressive economic initiatives than Biden did upon taking office and has dropped the public health insurance option that he campaigned on in 2020. The most expensive item on Harris’s fiscal agenda is the extension of Trump’s 2017 tax cuts for households earning less than $400,000 (Harris would offset some of these costs with tax increases on corporations and high earners).

If Trump wins, it’s likely that the next Democratic president’s economic ambitions would be even more modest than Harris’s are today.

Should Trump win the presidency, Republicans will have an excellent shot of controlling both the House and Senate. In that scenario, the party would likely enact the bulk of Trump’s proposed tax cuts, adding as much as $7.5 trillion to the deficit.

Even if Trump only manages to increase the deficit by a fraction of this sum, it would likely constrain moderate Democrats’ appetite for new social spending the next time the party takes power.

The Election, Explained A pop-up newsletter explaining the 2024 election — the candidates, the issues that matter most, and how it will all impact your life. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Already in 2021, a significantly lower national debt total rendered Sen. Joe Manchin unwilling to endorse more than a sliver of Biden’s program. Since then, following the post-pandemic spike in inflation and interest rates, Democratic wonks have grown significantly more concerned about America’s long-term fiscal trajectory. As we get closer to 2032 — when, according to projections, Social Security will cease taking in enough revenue to cover its benefits — anxieties about how the government will sustain its existing commitments will increase.

The easiest way for Congress to cover Social Security’s shortfall in 2033 would be to pay for the program’s unfunded benefits with general revenue. But this would cost $440.1 billion that year, according to the Congressional Research Service, with the sum increasing steadily over time. To put that in context, merely sustaining Social Security’s existing benefits would cost more than all of Harris’s current proposals for expanding social welfare combined, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget’s score of the latter.

By itself, Social Security’s trajectory is enough to threaten Democrats’ fiscal ambitions. Add in another round of deficit-swelling tax cuts, and Biden’s Build Back Better agenda may come to seem as politically moribund in 2029 as Sanders’s health care plans do today.

Democrats aren’t going to party like it’s 1999

There are three caveats to this analysis. The first is that anticipating how American politics will change over four years is not easy, as any pundit who followed both the 2012 and 2016 elections can tell you.

The second is that, should Harris lose, there would probably be tight limits to the Democrats’ moderation.

Unlike during Bill Clinton’s tenure, the Democratic Party no longer has the remnants of a center-right Southern wing. And unlike during much of the 20th century, socially conservative union heads and urban machines have no clout in blue America.

Rather, the Democratic coalition is more uniformly liberal than at any point in its history, and the same can be said of the party’s major advocacy groups. The contemporary leadership of the AFL-CIO is progressive on both economic and social issues, having forfeited the organization’s historic opposition to immigration in 2000. Meanwhile, progressive foundations, think tanks, and nonprofits have extraordinary influence in the party, effectively crafting much of Biden’s domestic agenda for him. And by most accounts, the rising generation of Democratic staffers is quite left-wing, their progressive impulses reinforced and sharpened by social media’s tendency toward group polarization.

The personal liberalism of Democratic elites will act as a check on any rightward pivot. Where there is no apparent political cost to upholding progressive principles, Democrats are likely to retain their current positioning or perhaps even move left. This category of issues would include abortion rights, minimum wage hikes, and pro-labor policies, among other things.

The third caveat is that this is not intended as a case for fatalism. I think Americans have a strong interest in higher levels of legal immigration and a more expansive welfare state. Neither Social Security’s impending shortfall nor another round of tax cuts will make it impossible for Democrats to create ambitious new social welfare programs. The party could simply enact large tax increases if it found the political will.

Progressives should try to forge that will by persuading the public of their views and discouraging Democrats from giving unnecessary ground. The ideological trajectory of America and the Democratic Party is not fixed.

But should Harris lose, the path of least resistance will cut to the right.
The Today, Explained podcast is taking a deep dive into the major themes of the 2024 election through the lens of seven battleground states. We’ve heard from voters in Georgia, Pennsylvania, Arizona, and Wisconsin so far; this week we turn to North Carolina, where a storm last month devastated the state — and some of its election infrastructure.

Officials in North Carolina are preparing for an election like no other in the wake of Hurricane Helene. The storm scrambled North Carolinians’ voting infrastructure — washing away absentee ballots, disrupting mail service, and destroying polling locations — and could impact what Election Day looks like in two weeks.

The state is expected to be close — former President Donald Trump won by just 1.3 percentage points in 2020, and current polling averages suggest an even tighter race this year — and all eyes are on the mountains, which received the brunt of the hurricane’s impact.

While some parts of life are getting back to normal after Hurricane Helene swept through last month — power returning, internet service restored — many people in the west of the state are still without potable water in their homes.

With so many people displaced or managing repairs, experts have raised concerns about depressed voter turnout.

“The question is going to be: If you’re having to avoid swallowing water while you shower, how important is voting going to be to you?” Steve Harrison, a political reporter at NPR affiliate station WFAE, told Today, Explained host Sean Rameswaram.

In an effort to ensure the election proceeds as close to normally as possible, local election officials have been allowed to move polling locations and adjust hours. The state has also updated rules for absentee voters, allowing them to return their completed ballots to counties other than their home county, as previously required, though the state stopped short of re-instituting a three-day grace period for ballots to be returned for counting.

Even with the added flexibility, actually communicating the changes to voters in the affected areas remains challenging. “Information is hard to get, because the internet is down and cell service is down, and everything changes on a day-to-day basis,” Buncombe County resident Kaitlyn Leaf said. “Sometimes hour by hour.” (Leaf is married to a Vox Media employee, audio engineer Patrick Boyd.)

So far, officials’ efforts to create more flexibility for voters seem to be paying off: The state set a turnout record on the first day of early voting, which began in all 100 counties on October 17, though it’s unclear how many of those votes were cast in the affected areas.

These voters could have an outsized impact on the outcome of the national election, according to Harrison’s analysis. Of the 15 counties that were most impacted by Helene, Biden won only two in 2020: Buncombe, home to the liberal city of Asheville, and Watauga, where Appalachian State University is located. The rest? Trump won by wide margins.

Polling averages show the 2024 presidential race in North Carolina as a dead heat, which means any decrease in turnout in those counties could ultimately hurt the former president’s chances.

“If it’s incredibly close, I don’t think we’re going to hear the last of Helene,” Harrison told Today, Explained.

Election Day worries in other battleground states, briefly explained

North Carolina isn’t the only state that could run into Election Day obstacles, though Hurricane Helene’s impact makes its situation unique. Extraordinarily thin margins and wrinkles in the vote-counting rules in other battleground states could delay the full results of the election past November 5.

With polls showing several of the battleground states neck and neck between Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris, election officials are warning they may need to count a greater share of ballots before media organizations are able to reliably make their projections, resulting in a multiday process similar to 2020.

Many states are also dealing with last-minute attempts to purge voter rolls and change election rules. But at least two states are likely to see delays because their election rules stayed the same.

In Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, election officials are barred from processing mail ballots until 7 am on Election Day. In other states with mail-in ballots, workers may prepare ballots for counting earlier — verifying signatures, flattening the ballots — in order to streamline vote counting on Election Day. Wisconsin and Pennsylvania election workers’ later starts may result in delayed calls this year, particularly if the race comes down just a few thousand votes.

Both state legislatures considered updating their rules after the 2020 election, but conspiracy theories and partisan gridlock ultimately killed bills that would have done so.

“It’s a real frustration,” Pennsylvania Secretary of State Al Schmidt told CNN in September. “[The proposed legislation] does not benefit any candidate. It does not benefit any party. It only benefits the public in knowing results earlier and our election officials, who otherwise don’t have to work day and night.”

As we saw in 2020, any delay between Election Day and the final results leaves ample room for conspiracy theories to take hold — something Trump is likely to take full advantage of. In 2020, Trump posted about “surprise ballot dumps” in Milwaukee after a jump in Biden votes when the city reported all of its absentee ballots at the same time. (He still falsely claims that he won Wisconsin in 2020.)

CNN political correspondent Sara Murray says voters ought to ignore the conspiracy theories in the event of a longer wait for results in 2024.“Just because this takes a couple of days doesn’t mean that there is some kind of mass-scale voter fraud going on,” she told Today, Explained. “It doesn’t mean machines are flipping votes. It doesn’t mean people are throwing away ballots. It just means election workers are still counting the votes.”
Local voter guides: Find candidate information and resources in your community

toggle caption Timothy A. Clary/AFP via Getty Images

The 2024 voting season is well underway.

In addition to covering the presidential campaigns, the NPR network is following the races, issues and decisions being made in your community. Control of state legislatures are up for grabs, ballot issues are tackling major issues like abortion.

More from NPR: Three states show how abortion, schools and taxes are at stake in legislature races

NPR member stations are gathering information for voters — from how to register down to races in local offices. They offer guides, resources and news reporting from communities across the country to help you be informed for this year's election.

Sponsor Message

More from NPR: Which party controls the legislature in each state?

Scroll through to find your state and the resources available from your local member station.

Alabama

Local reporting:

📍 Local news from WBHM in Birmingham

Alaska

Voting resources:

➡️ Voting guide from Alaska Public Media

Arizona

Voting resources:

➡️ Statewide voter guide from KJZZ

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from Arizona Public Media

📍 Phoenix-area local news from KJZZ

📍 Flagstaff local news from KNAU

📍 Yuma local news from KAWC

Arkansas

Local reporting:

📍 Local news from Little Rock Public Radio

📍 Local news from KASU in Northeastern Arkansas

California

Voting resources:

➡️ Statewide voter guide from KQED

➡️ Chico voter guide from NSPR

➡️ Los Angeles County voter guide from LAist

➡️ Orange County voter guide from LAist

➡️ Sacramento voter guide from CapRadio

➡️ San Diego voter guide from KPBS

Local reporting:

📍 Bay area local news from KALW

📍 Fresno local news from KVPR

📍 Mendocino County local news from KZYX

📍 San Luis Obispo local news from KCBX

Colorado

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Colorado Public Radio

➡️ Voter guide from KSUT

Local reporting:

📍 Aspen local news from Aspen Public Radio

📍 Denver local news from Denverite

📍 Greeley area news from KUNC

Connecticut

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WSHU

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from Connecticut Public

Sponsor Message

Delaware

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Delaware Public Media

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from WHYY

District of Columbia

Local reporting:

📍 Local news from WAMU

Florida

Voting resources:

➡️ Jacksonville area voter guides from JaxToday

➡️ Miami area voter guide from WLRN

➡️ Orlando area voter guide from Central Florida Public Media

➡️ Tallahassee area voter guide from WFSU

➡️ Tampa area voter guide from WUSF

Local reporting:

📍 Fort Myers local news from WGCU

📍 Gainesville local news from WUFT

📍 Pensacola area news from WUWF

Georgia

Local reporting:

📍 Local news from WABE

Guam

Local reporting:

📍 Local news from Isla Public Radio

Hawai'i

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Hawai'i Public Radio

Idaho

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Boise State Public Radio

Illinois

Voting resources:

➡️ Guide to state ballot questions from IPM News

➡️ Greater Peoria voter guide from WCBU

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from NPR Illinois

📍 Bloomington-Normal area news from WGLT

📍 Chicago local news from WBEZ

📍 DeKalb area news from Northern Public Radio

📍 Macomb area news from TriState Public Radio

Indiana

Voting resources:

➡️ Voting guide from IPB news

➡️ Voter guide from WFYI

➡️ Pittston area voter guide from WVIA

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from Indiana Public Media

📍 Muncie local news from IPR

📍 Fort Wayne local news from WBOI

Iowa

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Iowa Public Radio

Kansas

Voting resources:

➡️ Statewide voter guide from Kansas Public Radio

➡️ Kansas City voter guide from KCUR

Local reporting:

📍 Wichita local news from KMUW

📍 Pittsburg area news from KRPS

Kentucky

Local reporting:

📍 Statewide news from Kentucky Public Radio

📍 Murray area news from WKMS

📍 Bowling Green area news from WKYU

📍 Morehead area news from WMKY

Louisiana

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WRKF/WWNO

Maine

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Maine Public

Maryland

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WEAA

Local reporting:

📍Baltimore local news from WYPR

📍Statewide news from WAMU

Massachussets

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WBUR

➡️ Guide to ballot questions from GBH

Sponsor Message

Local reporting:

📍Cape Cod news from WCAI

📍Western Mass news from NEPM

Michigan

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Michigan Public

➡️ Voter guide from WDET

Local reporting:

📍East Lansing local news from WKAR

📍Interlochen local news from Interlochen Public Radio

📍Ypsilanti, Ann Arbor and Washtenaw County local news from WEMU

Minnesota

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from MPR

Mississippi

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from Mississippi Public Broadcasting

📍Jackson local news from WJSU

Missouri

Voting resources:

➡️ Statewide voter guide from St. Louis Public Radio

➡️ Kansas City voter guide from KCUR

Local reporting:

📍Springfield local news from KSMU

Montana

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Montana Public Radio

Nebraska

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from Nebraska Public Media

Nevada

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from KNPR

Local reporting:

📍Local news from KUNR

New Hampshire

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from New Hampshire Public Radio

New Jersey

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WHYY

New Mexico

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from KUNM

Local reporting:

📍Local news from KRWG

New York

Voting resources:

➡️ Statewide voter guide from WRVO

➡️ Long Island voter guide from WSHU

➡️ Rochester area voter guide from WXXI

Local reporting:

📍Buffalo area news from WBFO

📍New York City local news from Gothamist

📍North Country regional news from NCPR

📍Syracuse area news from WAER

North Carolina

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WUNC

Local reporting:

📍Asheville local news from Blue Ridge Public Radio

📍Charlotte local news from WFAE

📍Winston-Salem local news from WFDD

North Dakota

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from Prairie Public

Ohio

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from The Ohio Newsroom

Local reporting:

📍Cleveland local news from Ideastream Public Media

📍Columbus local news from WOSU

📍Cincinnati local news from WVXU

Oklahoma

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from KGOU

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from KOSU

Oregon

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from OPB

Local reporting:

📍Southern Oregon news from Jefferson Public Radio

📍Western and Central Oregon news from KLCC

Sponsor Message

Pennsylvania

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WHYY

➡️ Pittsburgh metro area voter guide from WESA

➡️ Pittston area voter guide from WVIA

Local reporting:

📍Harrisburg local news from WITF

📍University Park local news from WPSU

Rhode Island

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from The Public's Radio

South Carolina

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from South Carolina Public Radio

South Dakota

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from South Dakota Public Broadcasting

Tennessee

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WPLN

Texas

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from KERA

Local reporting:

📍Austin local news from KUT

📍Dallas local news from KERA

📍Houston local news from Houston Public Media

📍Marfa local news from Marfa Public Radio

📍San Antonio local news from TPR

Utah

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from Utah Public Radio

📍Park City local news from KPCW

📍Salt Lake City local news from KUER

Vermont

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from Vermont Public

Virginia

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from VPM

➡️ Hampton Roads area voter guide from WHRO

Local reporting:

📍Northern Virginia news from WAMU

Virgin Islands

Local reporting:

📍Local news from WTJX

Washington

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from KNKX

📍Seattle local news from KUOW

📍Pullman local news from Northwest Public Broadcasting

📍Spokane local news from Spokane Public Radio

West Virginia

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from West Virginia Public Broadcasting

Wisconsin

Voting resources:

➡️ Voter guide from WUWM

➡️ Candidate guide from Wisconsin Public Radio

Local reporting:

📍Rhinelander local news from WXPR

Wyoming

Local reporting:

📍Statewide news from Wyoming Public Media

For more legislative coverage, check out NPR's Who controls the states? series.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump’s recent public appearances have been marked by his apparent confusion, by rambling speeches and by his bizarre claims that go beyond mere gaffes or misstatements. In one particularly troubling incident during a town hall event, Trump vividly described what he said was the audience’s reactions to the debate he had against Vice President Kamala Harris. There was no audience when Trump debated Harris.

As a physician, admittedly one who hasn’t examined Trump or observed him in person, I find myself increasingly concerned about his cognitive fitness. While age-related decline is a reality millions of Americans must confront, his recent appearances and the questionable credibility of reports made by his treating physicians should make us all concerned.

Trump vividly described what he said was the audience’s reactions to the debate he had against Vice President Kamala Harris. There was no audience when Trump debated Harris.

In a previous piece focused on President Joe Biden after his poor debate performance against Trump, I discussed the challenge of addressing cognitive decline in our leaders without trafficking in ageist stereotypes. That remains a challenge but, in part because Trump has not released a detailed medical report as presidential candidates typically do, we must raise questions about his mental state and his decision-making abilities.

The red flags include Trump’s language — not just his characteristic falsehoods and misinformation — but also clinically concerning changes. An analysis by several experts found that over the last decade, Trump has used shorter sentences, gone on more tangents, engaged in more repetition, and increasingly confused words and phrases. Those experts suggested these changes could indicate the beginning stages of cognitive decline, potentially dementia, a risk we know he is predisposed to given both his age and a direct family history. Trump’s father, Fred Trump, was diagnosed with dementia. While this doesn’t mean his son will develop the same condition, it does increase his risk and it underscores the importance of a thorough cognitive evaluation, the results of which should be made public to voters.

Vice President Kamala Harris recently released her comprehensive medical records. Her physician, Dr. Joshua Simmons, provided a detailed overview of her health, including specific information about her medical history, her current medications and preventive health measures. This level of transparency should be the standard for all candidates seeking the presidency.

Trump’s last thorough medical exam that we know of was conducted by then-White House physician Dr. Ronny Jackson in 2018. It was the first physical he released when he was president. The exam was still filled with inappropriate hyperbole, that the president was “very sharp” and that he was “absolutely ... fit for duty,” not just for the remainder of the term, but also for another four years if he was re-elected.

Since that time, we don’t know that he’s had a single thorough exam similar to those that President Joe Biden and Harris have had. (They’ve made the results of their exams public.) In contrast, Drs. Jackson and Bruce Aronwold, who’ve examined Trump, have released results of physical exams that are only sparse narrative paragraphs and lack any detail.

In any other medical setting, their reports would be rejected as inadequate documentation. “His physical exams were well within the normal range and his cognitive exams were exceptional,” Dr. Aronwold notes, with no details. The vice president’s physical, by contrast, notes a series of details around vitals, lab values and specifics that are common in a detailed physical. Dr. Jackson’s history of questionable medical assessments casts a shadow over the validity of Trump’s health report.

Cognitive decline and mental impairment affect not just the individual, but they also manifest in an entire household. If Trump is on the decline, as his struggles during public appearances suggest he is, then it likely means that members of his family are experiencing the “downward spiral of silence” that is often seen in spouses and caregivers. To be clear, the former first family is like no other, with more resources and higher degrees of access to assistance. Yet, the silence to intervene, especially lately, is deafening.

Dr. Jackson’s history of questionable medical assessments casts a shadow over the validity of Trump’s health report.

It’s crucial to emphasize that these concerns are not partisan in nature. A June 2024 News/YouGov survey found that approximately 25% of American voters express doubts that either Biden or Trump was mentally and cognitively fit enough for the presidency. Biden withdrew from the race but Trump has not even acknowledged calls for further evaluation. Instead, he’s said that it’s Harris who needs to take a cognitive test. Harris, who turned 60 Sunday, hasn’t shown any signs that she has any cognitive difficulties.

As we approach another election, it’s imperative that we prioritize transparency and accountability in all aspects of candidate evaluation, including health assessments. The American people deserve leaders who are not only ideologically aligned with their values, but also physically and mentally capable of handling the rigors of the presidency.

While we must be cautious not to perpetuate ageist stereotypes, we cannot ignore that Trump, who would be the oldest president in American history, is exhibiting such worrisome signs. The presidency is not just any job — it requires sharp mental acuity, sound judgment and the ability to process complex information quickly. Trump’s behavior and the lack of credible information about his health, including his cognitive health, are deeply worrisome.

In the interest of democracy and of national security, we need all presidential candidates to commit to transparent, comprehensive, independent cognitive assessments conducted by respected medical professionals with no political affiliations. Only then can we make truly informed decisions about who’s best to lead our nation.
A look into Trump's recent rhetoric focusing on revenge and threats

Enlarge this image toggle caption Win McNamee/Getty Images Win McNamee/Getty Images

Earlier this month, former President Trump told Fox News' Maria Bartiromo that the United States has two enemies.



"We have the outside enemy, and then we have the enemy from within. And the enemy from within, in my opinion, is more dangerous than China, Russia, and all those countries, because if you have a smart president, he can handle them."



It's something Trump talks about a lot. He doubled down on his remarks a few days later in a Fox town hall, describing these so-called enemies as "Marxists, communists, and fascists."

Prominent Democrats like former U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Rep. Adam Schiff fall into this categorization as well.



Trump told Fox News earlier that if these "enemies" disrupt Election Day, the military should step in.



"I think it should be very easily handled by, if necessary, by National Guard, or if really necessary, by the military, because they can't let that happen,"

Sponsor Message

You're reading the Consider This newsletter, which unpacks one major news story each day. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to more from the Consider This podcast.

Trump's enemies, identified

An NPR investigation has found more than 100 times when Trump has said his rivals, critics and even private citizens should be investigated, prosecuted, put in jail or otherwise punished.



NPR Investigative Correspondent Tom Dreisbach outlined just a few:

First, there are his political rivals: he has promised to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Joe Biden and has said Kamala Harris should be prosecuted.

Trump has reposted Truth Social posts, calling for former President Barack Obama, and former congresswoman Liz Cheney to be sent to military tribunals.

On social media and at rallies, Trump has threatened prosecutors, some judges, courtroom staff and even a grand juror involved in his criminal and civil cases.

He has also said election workers, journalists and private citizens who criticize the Supreme Court should be jailed.

The credibility of these threats.

Ian Bassin is an expert on authoritarian movements with the group Protect Democracy. He says that Trump's threats could endanger Americans' civil liberties.



"This is how autocrats cement their permanent grip on power," Bassin told NPR.



All of these threats raise a question: if Trump won reelection, could he tell the Justice Department to go after all of these people?



Bassin says the answer is, essentially, yes.



"There are not really legal restrictions or even structural restrictions that would stop the president from simply directing them to go and investigate his perceived opponents," Bassin said.



Some of Trump's allies have promised to undo the decades-long custom that the White House stays out of the Justice Department's decision-making.



"The Department of Justice is not an independent agency," said former Trump administration official Russell Vought at a conference last year. "If anyone brings it up in a policy meeting in the White House, I want them out of the meeting."



There are some guardrails protecting against abuses of power by federal law enforcement. Judges have the power to dismiss cases, and can refuse to sign off warrants, for example. But Bassin said a weaponized Justice Department could still do serious damage to democracy, by convincing people that just criticizing the president might make them a target.



So, would Trump really do it?



Listen to today's episode of Consider This to find out.

This episode was produced by Monika Evstatieva and Brianna Scott. It was edited by Barrie Hardymon and Courtney Dorning. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
Biden administration proposes a rule to make over-the-counter birth control free

toggle caption Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

The Biden administration is proposing a rule that would expand access to contraceptive products, including making over-the-counter birth control and condoms free for the first time for women of reproductive age who have private health insurance.

Under the proposal by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Labor Department, and Treasury Department, which was announced by the administration on Monday, health insurance companies would be required to cover all recommended over-the-counter contraception products, such as condoms, spermicide and emergency contraception, without a prescription and at no cost, according to senior administration officials.

Sponsor Message

It would also require private health insurance providers to notify recipients about the covered over-the-counter products.

The proposed rule comes as the Biden administration seeks to expand access to contraceptives and as other reproductive health, including access to abortion, has become a central issue in the 2024 presidential election campaign. Republican-led states have restricted access to abortion since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in 2022. About half of states now ban or severely restrict abortion, which has coincided with steep declines in prescriptions for birth control and emergency contraception in those states.

HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra said when health care insurers impose burdensome administrative or cost sharing requirements for services, “access to contraceptives become even more difficult.”

“We have heard from women who need a specific brand of birth control but the cost of their prescription isn’t covered by their health insurance. We have made clear that in all 50 states the Affordable Care Act guarantees coverage of women’s preventive services without cost sharing, including all birth control methods approved by the Food and Drug Administration,” Becerra told reporters. “This proposed rule will build on the progress we have already made under the Affordable Care Act to help ensure that more women can access the contraceptive services they need without out-of-pocket costs.”

Sponsor Message

The products would be able to be accessed the same way prescription medicines are accessed, such as at the pharmacy counter, according to senior administration officials. Getting the products through reimbursement would also be an option, depending on the health insurance plan, officials said.

Birth control became available to those with insurance without a copay because of the Affordable Care Act, but that required a prescription.

In July 2023, a daily oral birth control pill, Opill, became the first over-the-counter birth control pill to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration. It became available for purchase online in March and can be purchased for $19.99.

The Biden administration in January announced several actions aimed at strengthening access to abortion and contraceptives, including the Office of Personnel Management issuing guidance to insurers that will expand access to contraception for federal workers, families and retirees.

There will be a comment period on the proposed rule and if approved, it could go into effect in 2025, according to senior administration officials.

However, if former President Donald Trump wins the election, he could reverse the rule.

NPR’s Sydney Lupkin and Bill Chappell contributed to this report.
This article is the first in a five-part series called “Protecting the Election.” As former President Donald Trump and many of his allies refuse to concede his defeat in the 2020 election, this MSNBC Daily series brings election law and policy experts to explore the many threats to certifying election results at both the state and national level.

Normally, the period after an American presidential election is a time for cooling off and winding down tensions, and is often a bit of a political “honeymoon” for the winner. But as in so many things, we are not living in an era of electoral normalcy.

Luckily, we do have some new guardrails, enacted in response to the attempts to overturn the 2020 election. The Electoral Count Reform Act (ECRA), signed into law in 2022, updates and shores up many of the antiquated procedures from the old Electoral Count Act of 1887, which proved so unhelpful in 2020. The 2024 election will be ECRA’s first test, and it may well be a trial by fire. And unlike the 2020 election, the stress test might come from both sides of the aisle.

The Electoral Count Reform Act updates and shores up many of the antiquated procedures from the old Electoral Count Act of 1887.

In deciding a possible dispute over the most powerful office in the world, the rule of law is paramount. The process of an American presidential election is intricate and complex, with thousands of state and federal officials having a role in the final outcome. But the legal parameters of how any potential disputes will play out are reasonably clear and worth reviewing in advance.

When is Election Day?

The first question answered by ECRA is deceptively simple: When is Election Day? As is tradition, this date remains set at the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, which this year is Nov. 5. But as hurricanes and their aftermath continue to batter states in the Southeast, the question of an election-disrupting emergency is not entirely hypothetical. The same issue arises from the possibility of a terrorist attack, mass shooting or other disruption to polling places on Election Day. ECRA provides an answer for how such emergencies can be fairly and lawfully handled.

Under the newly reformed federal law, Election Day is defined as the usual date, except that voting may be extended “as necessitated by force majeure events that are extraordinary and catastrophic.” By qualifying election emergencies in this manner, ECRA makes clear that litigation or other legal disputes over a state’s administration of the election do not qualify. (Using force majeure in this manner was a particular suggestion I’d advocated during ECRA’s drafting). Only events outside of the state’s control, such as a natural disaster, are sufficient to extend the deadline otherwise set according to Congress’ constitutional power to determine the “time of choosing electors.”

As with most other matters under ECRA, states must apply their election laws as they stood on Election Day, with no later alterations permitted, such as by the legislature convened in a special session. In each state, a possible emergency invocation of these extended voting procedures is assigned to a designated official, who may be the governor, secretary of state or a state elections board. This rule also forecloses the idea, advocated by some during the 2020 election, of state legislatures or other officials attempting to overturn the results of the state’s popular vote.

Counting the votes

The next step in the process is the counting of votes and the ascertainment of a winner in each state. Here, ECRA provides a remedy intended to address problems not just from 2020 but also from the notorious 2000 election. Instead of the usual cumbersome procedure for federal litigation, where lawsuits must be filed first in a district court and then appealed to one of the circuit courts before finally reaching the Supreme Court, a special three-judge panel is provided, consisting of two circuit judges and one district judge. This court’s rulings are then directly appealable to the Supreme Court, ensuring a prompt resolution of both legitimate legal objections and possible rogue actions by state officials. If any state official refuses to comply, the courts are empowered to order another official to provide the necessary certifications.

Electoral College ballot boxes arrive to a joint session of Congress to count the Electoral College votes of the 2020 presidential election in the House Chamber in 2021. Erin Scott / Pool via Getty Images file

It is this procedure that would come into play if, for example, a state’s governor refused to certify the properly chosen members of the Electoral College, or if a secretary of state refused to certify the popular vote totals on which that certification depends. The final “certificate of ascertainment” from each state naming its electors must be finalized no later than Dec. 11, six days before the Electoral College meets.

Once each state’s popular election result is finalized, the state then appoints its members of the Electoral College. These electors, nominated by each party in advance, meet in their respective state capitals on Dec. 17 to officially cast the votes that will actually determine who has won the election. In most states, as upheld by the Supreme Court in the 2020 ruling Chiafalo v. Washington, these electors are bound by state law to vote for their party’s nominees. The candidate who wins an absolute majority of the electoral votes, currently 270, thereby becomes the president-elect.

Changes to congressional certification

The next stage of the process comes when these votes are transmitted, as required by the 12th Amendment, to the president of the Senate, otherwise known as the vice president — currently Kamala Harris. She will not be the first vice president to preside over a certification of her own victory or defeat, a task previously carried out by Al Gore, Richard Nixon and George H.W. Bush, among others.

But contrary to theories rejected by then-Vice President Mike Pence in 2020, ECRA affirms that the vice president’s role is purely ceremonial and entails no discretion whatsoever. Instead, the limited range of possible disputes at the electoral count on Jan. 6 must be decided by Congress.

ECRA deliberately pushes most possible disputes over election results into the courts.

Here, ECRA makes an important change from the old Electoral Count Act. Previously, only one member of each house of Congress was required to object to electoral votes, sending the matter to a debate and vote. It was under this provision that some Republican members objected to the electoral votes for Joe Biden in 2020, a procedure interrupted by the attack on the Capitol.

Now, objections require the co-sponsorship of at least one-fifth of each house, or at least 87 representatives together with at least 20 senators. None of the objections attempted at the last electoral count would have cleared this threshold. Lacking enough support, frivolous objections will instead be gaveled down as out of order.

ECRA deliberately pushes most possible disputes over election results into the courts. In particular, objections to the identity of the proper electors based on who actually won each state’s popular vote are to be litigated in advance, with a definitive court ruling then binding on Congress. This would cover the objections advanced by Donald Trump supporters in the last election, which essentially alleged that the wrong slate of electors had been certified in several key swing states. No longer will Congress play any role in deciding between competing slates of supposed electors, and only one legitimate slate’s votes will be presented during the joint session.

Another set of objections remains within Congress’ purview, as required by the Constitution. These cover whether the votes by otherwise legitimate electors were improper, or in the legal term of art, “regularly given.” This would include, for example, a hypothetical objection to electors’ failure to cast their votes on the prescribed day, which the Constitution requires to be the same in every state. It would also cover, somewhat less hypothetically, an objection that the votes were cast for an ineligible presidential candidate.

It is on this point that objections from Democratic members of Congress are possible, on the basis that Trump is disqualified under Section 3 of the 14th Amendment, a provision adopted after the Civil War to bar oath-breaking insurrectionists.

Though the Supreme Court ruled earlier this year that states may not kick Trump off the ballot on this basis, the question of whether he is actually disqualified remains for Congress to decide. This objection might be raised to votes cast for him even if he has already lost, and would require majorities in both the House and Senate to sustain.

To the maximum degree consistent with the Constitution, ECRA sought to put electoral disputes into the courts rather than being decided by Congress.

Once Congress completes the electoral count on Jan. 6, the process is over and its results are final, except in the unlikely event that no candidate has won the necessary majority of 270 electoral votes. In this scenario, under the 12th Amendment, a “contingent election” would be held, with the House electing the president (under an unusual procedure where each state delegation casts one vote) and the Senate would choose the vice president.

To the maximum degree consistent with the Constitution, ECRA sought to put electoral disputes into the courts rather than being decided by Congress. Any arguments over which candidate, and thus which party’s slate of electors, has won a state’s popular vote is to be decided in federal court prior to when the Electoral College meets in December. In all cases, state law as it stands on Election Day is decisive, and states may not change the rules after the fact.

Congress, with the vice president presiding ceremonially but having no say in the matter, is empowered to address only a narrow set of questions about whether the otherwise valid electors have cast their votes in a permissible manner under the Constitution, such as for a candidate who is not a natural-born citizen or who is not at least 35 years old. But the role of Congress will not be to relitigate disputes over how each state conducted its election.

Once this process is complete — state laws implementing a popular election for members of the Electoral College, courts deciding any disputes over the outcome of those elections, the duly appointed electors meeting and casting their votes, and Congress counting the electoral votes — the winner will be sworn in at noon on Jan. 20, a date and time set in stone by the 20th Amendment.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Washington CNN —

Former President Donald Trump used a Monday visit to North Carolina to repeat debunked lies about the federal response to Hurricane Helene.

Speaking to reporters in a hard-hit community near Asheville, Trump kept repeating a false claim that was widely debunked when he made it earlier in October – his assertion that the Federal Emergency Management Agency took money that was supposed to go to disaster relief and instead spent it on migrants who entered the country illegally, leaving the agency with no funds to help Americans.

“It’s all gone. They’ve spent it on illegal migrants,” Trump said. He also said: “Why did they spend hundreds of millions of dollars on something that they were not supposed to be spending it on?” And he said, “They were not supposed to be spending the money on taking in illegal migrants. Maybe so they could vote in the election, because that – a lot of people are saying that’s why they’re doing it. I don’t know, I hope that’s not why they’re doing it.”

The Republican presidential nominee said in the same remarks that now “they don’t have any money for the people that live here.” And at a rally later in the day in Greenville, he said, “You didn’t get the proper support from this administration. They spent their money on illegal migrants, they spent their money. They didn’t have any money left for North Carolina.”

These claims are false in at least four ways.

First, there is zero basis for Trump’s suggestion that FEMA or the Biden administration might be running some sort of scheme to get undocumented immigrants to vote illegally in the 2024 election.

Voting by noncitizens in federal elections is a felony, and Trump has provided zero evidence for his repeated assertions and insinuations about the Biden administration or FEMA supposedly trying to get undocumented people to vote in 2024.

Second, it’s not true that FEMA disaster assistance money was improperly reallocated to migrants.

Here’s what actually happened.

Congress appropriated $650 million in the 2024 fiscal year to fund a program that helps state and local governments house migrants. It instructed US Customs and Border Protection to transfer that $650 million to FEMA to administer the program.

But here’s the key: this $650 million pot is entirely distinct from FEMA’s much larger pot of disaster relief funds. As the Department of Homeland Security, the White House and some congressional Republicans noted earlier this month, they’re just two separate things funded separately by Congress – and Congress appropriated more than $35 billion in disaster relief funds for fiscal 2024, according to official FEMA statistics.

One of the Republicans who has debunked this Trump claim is Rep. Chuck Edwards of North Carolina, who was standing with Trump as the former president repeated the claim on Monday. Earlier this month, Edwards published a fact sheet that said, among other things, “FEMA has NOT diverted disaster response funding to the border or foreign aid.”

Third, it’s not true that FEMA’s money is “all gone.”

FEMA is not out of cash. As of last Tuesday, its Disaster Relief Fund had about $8.5 billion remaining, FEMA told CNN’s Ella Nilsen. FEMA officials have made clear that it has enough money for the immediate needs of people affected by Hurricane Helene – though the large number of disasters around the country this year, from tornadoes to wildfires to flooding to the recent hurricanes, means the agency might have to ask Congress for additional disaster relief funding sooner than expected.

Edwards wrote in his fact sheet: “FEMA is NOT going to run out of money. FEMA officials have repeatedly affirmed that the agency has enough money for immediate response and recovery needs over the next few months.”

It is true that Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas said early in the month that with another hurricane expected after Helene, “we do not have the funds, FEMA does not have the funds, to make it through the season.” But he said in the same comments that they were able to “meet immediate needs,” although “that doesn’t speak about the future”; he certainly didn’t say, as Trump did, that FEMA’s money was “all gone.”

Fourth, it’s not true that the Biden administration “didn’t have any money left for North Carolina.”

The Biden administration has provided various forms of assistance to North Carolina in the wake of Hurricane Helene. The White House says more than $300 million has been approved so far.

As of last Tuesday, FEMA in particular had approved more than $102 million in Helene-related assistance to individuals in North Carolina, the agency says, in addition to tens of millions in assistance to local governments in the state.
CNN —

Judges in Michigan and North Carolina rejected lawsuits brought by the Republican National Committee and others that challenged overseas ballots cast by voters abroad who never resided in the states.

The rulings in two separate cases on Monday are setbacks in efforts by Republicans to target the overseas vote, which has long seen as sacrosanct because of its tie to the military but now could be a crucial bloc for Democrats as the pool of civilian expats overseas now eclipses military voters serving outside the country.

Former President Donald Trump and his GOP allies have heralded the cases as essential to securing the integrity of the 2024 election – but their arguments fell flat in court. The Michigan judge called the lawsuit an “attempt to disenfranchise” voters, and the North Carolina judge said Republicans “presented no substantial evidence” of the fraud they claimed they were trying to prevent.

The RNC sued in Michigan and North Carolina to block state policies that allow for citizens abroad to cast ballots in those states if their parents (or, in Michigan, their spouse) resided in those states before leaving the country, even if the voters themselves never lived there.

Judge Sima Patel of Michigan’s Court of Claims said in her ruling that Republicans were too late in filing their lawsuit, calling it “11th hour attempt to disenfranchise” spouses and children of former Michigan residents who now live abroad.

In North Carolina, Wake County Superior Court Judge John W. Smith denied the RNC’s request for an emergency court order that would require election officials to set aside ballots from overseas voters who hadn’t themselves lived in the state.

Smith said that the RNC was challenging voting policies that were passed with bipartisan support by the North Carolina legislature and that the Republicans “have presented no substantial evidence of any instance where the harm that plaintiffs seek to prevent has ever ‘fraudulently’ occurred.”

CNN has reached out to the RNC and election officials in Michigan and North Carolina for comment. DNC spokesperson Alex Floyd said in a statement that the GOP-backed litigation “was nothing more than a transparent ploy to threaten the voting rights of military families and try to sow chaos in this election for cynical political ends.”

And Vice President Kamala Harris’ campaign used the rulings to accuse Republicans of “pulling out all the stops to block your vote,” in a statement Tuesday morning.

﻿Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson, who oversees the state’s elections and was sued by the RNC, hailed Patel’s court ruling as “a win for voters and democracy today in Michigan!” In a social media post, Benson, a second-term Democrat, touted the judge’s conclusion that the GOP was trying to “disenfranchise” some voters.

In Michigan and North Carolina, the policy of accepting ballots from those overseas voters have been on the books for several years. But starting in 2016, civilian voters abroad began outnumbering the military vote overseas – which itself is not as conservative as it once was. Democrats announced earlier this cycle a six-figure investment into turning out eligible Democrats abroad, particularly those who can vote in battleground states.

Michigan Republicans cited the reports of that turnout effort in their court filings in their challenge there.

Still, Patel noted in her ruling that the RNC’s Michigan lawsuit was filed just a few weeks before Election Day and well after the federal deadline for states to transmit ballots to overseas voters.

“It would be extremely difficult or impossible for defendants to design and carry out a program to reject potentially thousands of [absent voter ballots] at this time,” Patel wrote, while noting the “myriad tasks in the final days leading up to a general election” that election officials currently face.

“It is hard to imagine a more prejudicial situation arising from plaintiffs’ delay,” she wrote.

Patel was also not convinced by Republicans’ arguments that voter residency requirements in the Michigan Constitution preclude the state law that allows overseas citizens who had never lived in Michigan to vote there if they had a sufficient family tie. The judge embraced the arguments put forward by election officials defending the policy, who asserted that Michigan’s Constitution also gave the legislature the power to expand the pool of eligible voters.

Michigan officials said last week that they have received about 16,000 requests for overseas ballots. This is a tiny slice of the electorate – there are 8.4 million registered voters in the state, and more than 5.5 million Michiganders voted in the 2020 election.

This story has been updated with additional details and reaction.

CNN’s Devan Cole contributed to this report.
There are very few sure things, two weeks away from Election Day. One near-certainty, though, is that this election will be contested. The question is, will the system hold? Legal scholar Matthew Seligman wrote How to Steal a Presidential Election with professor Lawrence Lessig as less of a how-to guide than an exploration of “what’s next?” On this week’s Amicus podcast Dahlia Lithwick asked Seligman to share the legal and extralegal scenarios that are keeping him up at night as we count down to Nov. 5. A portion of their conversation, which has been edited and condensed for clarity, has been transcribed below.

Dahlia Lithwick: What of all of the scenarios that you lay out in the book is the scenario that you lie awake sweating about?

Matthew Seligman: My biggest worries center on two different scenarios.

The first is around the Electoral Count Reform Act. So the Electoral Count Reform Act was a law that was passed in late 2022. It’s an incredible improvement to the law of the electoral count. The old Electoral Count Act of 1887 governed how Congress counted the electoral votes on Jan. 6 and set some procedures in December for how states sent their electoral votes to Congress. But it was broken, and it was extremely unclear, and it was subject to catastrophic manipulation of the results. Now, somewhat against all odds, Congress actually passed this law, the Electoral Count Reform Act, in 2022, that strengthened the system in really important ways. It made it so governors didn’t have the same kind of control that could flip the election results. It also made it much more difficult for Congress to reject electoral votes.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

However, it made one important change that I think was well-intentioned but could have catastrophic unintended consequences. The well-intentioned part of this is that it seeks to eliminate the possibility of alternate electors.The basic idea behind the Electoral Count Reform Act is that when the governor certifies one set of electors, a court can review whether the governor has certified the right set of electors. Once we get to Congress on Jan. 6, Congress can count those electors—and those electors only—that were certified by the governor, as reviewed by a court. That sounds really good! It makes it seem like the only electoral votes that are going to get counted on Jan. 6 are the ones that a court has said, “Yes, these are the right electoral votes.”

Advertisement

The problem is that the old Electoral Count Act had a series of soft deadlines in mid-December. These soft deadlines said the governor of the state should certify by such and such a date in the middle of December. But it didn’t say that the governor had to, and there was no hard deadline. The Electoral Count Reform Act turns those soft deadlines into hard deadlines. So it seems to say that if the governor doesn’t certify a slate of electors by mid-December, or if there’s say a recount that goes until Christmas and it flips the result, that certification around Christmas of the new—the correct electors—that doesn’t count.

Advertisement

The hard deadline is on Dec. 17 this year. If that deadline is missed, then the state might not have any electors at all if the governor hasn’t certified any electors because he or she is unable to. Or if there’s a reverse of the legitimate results after that, then the state’s electoral votes are flipped. That creates a vulnerability to delay.

Advertisement

Advertisement

If there’s just a ton of litigation, if there are recounts that take a long time, if the process of certification going from county boards of election up to state secretaries of state over to the governor—if that process is drawn out too much, then the governor might not be in a position to certify any results at all, or may only be able to certify the wrong results.

If we look back to Bush v. Gore in 2000, there was a recount going on and in order for that recount to be done in the way that the Constitution required and for all the ballots to be reviewed in the same way, that was going to take too long. So the Supreme Court stopped the recount. They said that Florida had turned that soft deadline in December into a hard deadline. That’s exactly what we could see this time around, where the process is going too long and so there’s just no way to get to the right result.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related From Slate Suddenly, the Electoral College Is Posing a Problem for Trump Read More

So if scenario No. 1 is: Let’s imagine we’re following all of the procedures of the Electoral Count Reform Act, and because of delay, we don’t have the right certified electors in time, what do we do? Can we count the right electors or not? All those questions come from following the procedures of the Electoral Count Reform Act. But scenario No. 2 is—what if we don’t follow the procedures of the Electoral Count Reform Act?

The ECRA is a different kind of law than most laws. Most laws regulate stuff out in the world. You can’t pollute more than a certain amount, for example, and if you do, then somebody can sue and you go to court and the court decides the case, and then everybody has to follow the court’s ruling. The ECRA regulates what Congress does—the call is coming from inside the house. What happens if Congress decides not to follow the ECRA? Whether it’s both chambers of Congress, or more likely, a Republican House? What if they say, “I don’t care what the ECRA says, we’re not counting these bogus electoral votes because there were millions of illegal aliens and an Italian military satellite.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

If that happens, will a court step in? What do we do at that point? That’s really at the frontier of constitutional crisis. We’d be in uncharted territory. We don’t really know what courts could or would do in that situation.

So now I think we have to talk about the Josh Hawley problem because in the book you describe his behavior on Jan. 6 as “terrifyingly lawless,” in part because he knew better and chose to make up law on the fly.

You’ve already flagged how the Electoral Count Act was repaired and some of its ambiguities tightened, but I think that one of the reasons you and your co-author professor Lessig are so merciless in your assessment of Hawley’s behavior is because unlike laws that you can rewrite and fix and clear up, you can’t fix people who are willing to violate the plain meaning of the law as amended. But your Scenario Two brings us this question of Congress ultimately being the arbiter of its own lawfulness and the possibility of just making up the law as it goes along. That was an existential moment for me reading the book, because there’s no cure for that.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

There very well might not be. I mean in that scenario, on Jan. 7, do we go to the courts and try to say that Congress went rogue and was lawless? Do we say, “The House of Representatives is violating the law or the Constitution?” You could try. But do I have a great degree of confidence that the Supreme Court is going to go out of its way to try to save democracy in that scenario? I’m not so sure.

So yes, that is really concerning and to look retrospectively at what Josh Hawley did in 2020—he is a highly educated lawyer. He knows better. He was a law professor before he went into politics. When he was a law professor, he actually wrote a law review article about the 12th Amendment, which is the part of the Constitution that governs the electoral count. It’s one of the only law reviews ever written about the 12th Amendment. So he of all people should have known better. Nonetheless, he advanced these objections in the joint session that were just plainly not constitutional. They were objections about how the election in the state was, in his view, maladministered.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

That’s just not within the scope of Congress’ role there. As Mitch McConnell of all people said in his speech before the joint session started, Congress is not a National Board of Elections. That’s not its role. And that’s because states conduct elections, and then those results can be challenged in court. It’s just not what Congress is supposed to do.

But now, in the aftermath of all of that, and what we saw happen later in the day on Jan. 6, we have J.D. Vance, the vice presidential running mate, say that he wouldn’t have done what Mike Pence did on Jan. 6. What would he have done? Vance is not clear about that, but it’s certainly not the thing that he was constitutionally obligated to do. Vance says there should have been a political debate about the results of the election. That’s fundamentally wrong and in conflict with the rule of law, because the results of elections are not political debates.

Advertisement

The whole point is that whoever gets to hold political power next doesn’t depend on who had political power before. That’s how we have a peaceful transfer of power. So for J.D. Vance, who is now apparently the heir apparent to the MAGA movement, to say Donald Trump did not lose the 2020 election is a continuation in this trend of just being willing to disregard the law, to disregard reality about what the actual election results were, in order to have a “political debate” about what they feel the election results should have been.

Advertisement

Advertisement

That’s the thing that we have to guard against. The idea that the law sets some maybe clear procedural rules that they have to meet on Jan. 6 and maybe there have to be objections and so on, but everything else can be manipulated as part of a political project that’s driven by these conspiracy theories—conspiracy theories about noncitizen voting, which never really happens, and conspiracy theories about what the Constitution means. Even if we are able to get through the next several months, even if we are able to land the plane safely—that the lawful winner of the 2024 presidential election is the person who is sworn in and inaugurated on Jan. 20, 2025—we still have to confront that there is this deep reservoir of a political movement that is fundamentally not committed to the rule of law in our democracy.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Former President Donald Trump’s supporters were all over social media on Sunday, hailing his shift working at a Pennsylvania McDonald’s as a heartfelt and, apparently, unprecedented show of solidarity with working-class Americans.

But there’s nothing novel or unique about a politician taking a turn trying out an everyday job.

In fact, among those who have done it before is Vice President Kamala Harris ― more than once and, quite arguably, in a way that bears directly on the choice voters face in November. Her stints trying out working-class jobs line up neatly with her record on policy, as well as some of her best-known, potentially farthest-reaching proposals in the 2024 presidential campaign.

Advertisement

To put it a bit more bluntly: You can make a solid case that the people whose jobs Harris was trying would benefit directly from her agenda, but you’d have a tougher time making that case for Trump.

Trump At The The Drive-Thru

Trump’s stint was at a McDonald’s in Bucks County, northeast of Philadelphia, and lasted about 30 minutes. The 2024 Republican presidential nominee manned the fryer for a while, then took a turn at the drive-thru, where he served customers that the Secret Service had prescreened.

The goal ― well, one goal, at least ― was to troll Harris, who has long talked about her experience working at McDonald’s while she was in college. (Trump and his supporters have made baseless claims Harris never worked there.) But it was the spectacle of the entertainment and real estate mogul at the iconic fast food franchise, doing the familiar fast food work, that had his supporters enraptured and posting on X (formerly Twitter).

“One of the greatest moments in presidential campaign history,” wrote right-wing author and influencer Katie Pavlich. Commentator and 2020 Trump campaign official Tim Murtaugh said, “There has never been a better day of campaigning in Pennsylvania.”

Advertisement

Former President Donald Trump works behind the counter making french fries during a visit to McDonald's restaurant on Oct. 20 in Feasterville-Trevose, Pennsylvania. Pool via Getty Images

“Look at Trump at McDonalds,” right-wing activist Jack Posobiec told his nearly 3 million followers. “That stuff can’t be taught or faked. Authenticity. That’s the real deal.”

“Trump working at McDonald’s making fries might be one of the most powerful campaign moves in history,” wrote Philip Buchanan, the right-wing online activist who goes by the handle “Cattturd” and has 3 million followers of his own.

But politicians have been taking their turns at “normal” jobs for a long time. Bob Graham, the legendary Democrat from Florida who died earlier this year, turned the practice into an art form, serving once-a-month “workadays” through his career as a state legislator, governor and then U.S. senator.

Sometimes the turns were pretty quick, like when Republican John McCain stirred gumbo at a Florida restaurant in his 2008 presidential campaign, or when 2004 Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry stopped at a Pennsylvania factory.

Advertisement

The practice is so hackneyed, especially on Labor Day, that Politico actually did a photo essay about it called “On the Clock With Candidates at Their Fake Jobs.”

But sometimes the exercise is about more than a photo op – which brings us to Harris, who is among the politicians who have participated in a Service Employees International Union (SEIU) program called “Walk a Day.”

Harris’ Turns As A Service Worker

The idea of “Walk a Day” is to pair politicians with SEIU housekeepers, nurses and other members in the hopes politicians will remember just how demanding those jobs can be when it’s time to make policy.

Harris has done the “Walk a Day” at least twice. In July 2019, her first presidential campaign, she trailed a security officer in Detroit named Delores McDaniel. The effort included a visit to McDaniel’s subsidized housing, and a ride on the bus, according to an SEIU press release and video.

“She comes in the afternoon and works late into the night,” Harris said afterward, according to the release. “She has a two-hour commute to get here. She also does not get sick leave. She does not get paid family leave.”

Advertisement

Almost a decade earlier, while Harris was district attorney in San Francisco, Harris visited Wendy Ko, who was a caregiver for her elderly mother in the Bay Area. Video of that day, which SEIU reposted just two weeks ago, shows Harris helping Ko to lift her mother out of bed and to make and serve dinner.

“I don’t know how to describe it in any way, other than to say ― in total admiration and awe of the work that this woman was doing ― it’s hard work, it’s physically tasking, emotionally heavy work,” Harris said at the time.

Harris would go on to win that election. In the Senate, she focused on caregiving with particular attention to the needs of caregivers ― probably never more vividly than we she proposed a “domestic workers bill of rights” to make sure people who work in homes get some of the same labor protections as those who work in an office or factory.

In 2010, when @VP was a District Attorney, she took the time to spend a day with Wendy Ko, a home care provider in the Bay Area. Her commitment to creating a better world for workers has always been inspiring, let's get that energy to the White House.https://t.co/EykFupkhu4 — SEIU Local 2015 (@SEIU2015) October 8, 2024

She’s done the same as a presidential candidate, and just a few weeks ago rolled out a major (if wildly under-appreciated) proposal to have Medicare start covering some of the costs of long-term care at home. It would be an expensive proposition, full of difficult policy questions and tradeoffs that Harris has yet to address, but the reaction online made clear the enormous need it would address.

Advertisement

Nobody would suggest Harris made these proposals for caregivers because of the few hours she spent with Wendy Ko or Dolores McDaniel. If anything, she was likely inspired by her childhood memories of Regina Shelton, the local nursery school teacher Harris has called a “second mother,” and then her experience caring for her own mother, Shyamala Gopalan, while she was dying from cancer.

Harris has talked about that experience repeatedly, including at an economic policy speech in Pittsburgh last month.

“I remember being there for my mother when she was diagnosed with cancer,” Harris said. “Cooking meals for her, taking her to her appointments. Trying to make her comfortable, figuring out which clothes were soft enough that they wouldn’t irritate her. Telling her stories to try and make her laugh. I know caregiving is about dignity.”

Trump’s Actual Record And Agenda

It’s not clear whether any similar experiences shaped the views of Trump, who is the son of a real estate developer and was, as The New York Times once put it, “a millionaire by 8.” As for his record on policy, his signature legislative accomplishment as president was the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, whose benefits flowed overwhelmingly to the wealthy.

That law is also his only major legislative accomplishment, but only because his first priority — trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act — failed to get through Congress. The repeal legislation Trump backed would have dramatically cut spending on Medicaid and insurance subsidies for the middle class and working poor, causing millions and maybe tens of millions of Americans to lose their health coverage.

Advertisement

The centerpiece of Trump’s 2024 agenda is an across-the-board tariff on imported goods that he has said could replace the income tax. The broad consensus among experts is that in practice it would serve as a new tax that would slow growth and raise prices, with working Americans taking a particularly hard hit.

In fact, an October analysis from the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy found that his economic plans “would, on average, lead to a tax cut for the richest 5% of Americans and a tax increase for all other income groups.”

Trump insists the experts are wrong, that his agenda is all about helping average Americans, not the wealthy — even though, back in April, he reportedly courted ultra-wealthy donors at a private fundraiser by telling them he’d make them richer. Pitches like that may have worked, given all the money Trump and the organizations promoting his reelection have been getting from conservative and libertarian moguls.

During Sunday’s stint at McDonald’s, Trump answered questions in what The Associated Press called a “drive-thru press conference.” One of those was about whether Trump would support a higher minimum wage, which is something that would likely raise pay for fast food workers across the country.

Trump dodged the question, saying, “Well, I think this: These people work hard. They’re great. And I just saw something — a process that’s beautiful. It’s a beautiful thing.”
A couple of days after the first and only debate between Donald Trump and Kamala Harris, Fox News’ Ainsley Earhardt told viewers that if there were additional debates, there was one subject she didn’t want to hear the candidates discuss.

“Don’t touch on Jan. 6,” the Fox host said. “We all know about Jan. 6. We are sick of that. We need to move on.” The same week, The New York Times reported that Republicans “don’t want to talk about Jan. 6.”

Part of the problem with this is that it’s tough to move on from a crisis when those responsible for creating the crisis refuse to accept responsibility or express contrition. But the other part of the problem is that Trump clearly doesn’t want to stop talking about it.

In fact, as The Associated Press reported, the former president is adding ugly new details to his larger effort to rewrite history.

Former President Donald Trump on Friday compared the people jailed on charges that they stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, to the more than 120,000 people of Japanese origin incarcerated on U.S. soil during World War II. “Why are they still being held? Nobody’s ever been treated like this,” he said in an interview with conservative commentator Dan Bongino. “Maybe the Japanese during Second World War, frankly. They were held, too.”

He did not appear to be kidding.

In the same interview, the Republican nominee also lied about the Jan. 6 death toll, before lying about the insurrectionist rioters being unarmed.

To be sure, as Trump’s 2024 campaign has progressed, he has emphasized his support and affection for Jan. 6 rioters in a variety of ridiculous ways. The former president has defended them as “victims” and “hostages.” He has promised to reward them with pardons — including those who violently clashed with law enforcement. He has helped rioters raise money, and at one point he even released a song with Jan. 6 inmates.

I naively hoped the GOP candidate had reached the bottom of the barrel last week when he told a Univision town hall audience that there was “nothing done wrong” during the assault on the Capitol, while using the word “we” in reference to the insurrectionist rioters who attacked at his behest.

But when he compared Jan. 6 criminals to the victims of the Japanese internment camps, it became clear that Trump reached the bottom of the barrel, dug a hole, and fell a little farther.

In case that weren’t quite enough, on Friday, he also amplified a conspiracy theory that “the government staged a riot to cover up the fact that they certified a fraudulent election.”

Over the weekend, Trump then sat down with Fox News’ Howard Kurtz, bragged about the Jan. 6 crowd size, defended the rioters anew, and said in reference to the day’s developments, “There was a beauty to it and a love to it that I’ve never seen before.”

He also lied once again about the rioters being unarmed, and when Kurtz referenced reality, the former president was completely incredulous.

Harris, referencing Trump’s Jan. 6 rhetoric, told a Wisconsin audience last week, “The American people are exhausted with his gaslighting.” The Democratic vice president added, “Enough.”

We’ll find out in a couple of weeks whether she’s right.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Today, Vice President Kamala Harris turns 60. And the best years of her professional life are likely still ahead of her.

By presidential standards, of course, 60 is downright youthful. Harris’ current boss is 81. Her Republican opponent is 78. Both have fallen under intense scrutiny, with Donald Trump’s apparent cognitive decline casting an increasingly dark shadow over the election.

Compared to these much older men, Harris’ relative youth is palpable — even as she demonstrates the wisdom and pride that comes with age. As she celebrates on Sunday, Harris is actively shattering worn-out stereotypes about what 60 should look or feel like.

As she celebrates on Sunday, Harris is actively shattering worn-out stereotypes about what 60 should look or feel like.

I’ve scrutinized Harris’ campaign rallies and her September debate with Trump. It is very clear to me why he has refused to step back onstage with her.

For a moment there, right before their first (and only) debate began, I was worried. How would she hold up under the sometimes-cruel scrutiny presidential candidates typically experience? But almost immediately, my worries melted away. She owned that New York stage. Not just with her answers and her abilities — but with her posture, her joy, her eloquence and her control. Seeing Harris under those bright lights was inspiring — for women, and for anyone who has felt underestimated or marginalized.

She was magnificent. And that’s exactly what 60 means for women today: magnificence.

Indeed, Harris’ pride — in both her accomplishments and her experience — is clear whenever she steps up in public.

There’s no doubt that women over 50 face stigma and challenges associated with their age — especially in the workplace. According to a 2022 AARP survey, ageism is the most frequently reported type of discrimination among women 50 and older. This problem is even worse for women of color, with Black women over 50 reporting the highest levels of discrimination, according to the AARP, “with 70% saying they experience discrimination regularly.”

It’s a type of bias that, frankly, men don’t see as often. And it’s one more barrier many women face as they navigate their professional careers while also serving as mothers and caregivers.

Despite the importance of older women in the workplace, an analysis this year from the Center for American Progress suggests many women face professional headwinds as they age:

Median earnings for full-time women are highest among those in their early- to mid-40s and fall substantially at older ages: Women in their mid- to late-50s have earnings 5.6 percent lower than peak mid-career levels, and in their early- to mid-60s, women’s earnings are 8.0 percent below peak. By contrast, men’s earnings peak later—in the mid- to late-40s—and remain at that peak level for men about a decade older. When men’s earnings eventually begin to decline with age, they do so much more slowly. Center for American Progress

But when I see Harris onstage, I don’t see someone “old.” I see someone fabulous. I see someone accomplished. I see someone capable of becoming America’s first woman president.

I’m 57 years old; 60 is right around the corner. But Harris has made me excited about the milestone. I thought my career was going to be over at 40. And here comes the Democratic nominee, showing all of us why the best really can be ahead of us. There is still time to do your best work, to get the promotion of a lifetime, or to fulfill your biggest, brightest dreams.

In 2021, when my women’s empowerment platform, Know Your Value, partnered with Forbes to publish our first ever “50 Over 50” list, Harris — alongside television producer and screenwriter Shonda Rhimes, founder Julie Wainwright and investor Cathie Wood — headlined our inaugural edition. Flash forward to today, and as the Democratic nominee, Harris is seen as the “younger,” fresher contender. Imagine that.

Women in their 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s and beyond deserve to be valued. They deserve to be recognized. And lists like “50 Over 50” are a reminder that impact has no age limit. Women don’t have to peak before menopause. Men certainly don’t. Seeing Harris turn 60 on the campaign trail during the election of our lifetimes feels, frankly, fitting.

I have so many women role models who are 60 and over: Hillary Clinton, Claire McCaskill, Jill Biden, my mom. Emilie Benes Brzezinski was a sculptor who pursued her art with a chainsaw in hand until she was in her 90s.

In other words, getting older no longer feels like a barrier, but rather an asset.

So enjoy your birthday, Madame Vice President. You deserve it.
The rural-urban divide is one of the defining features of the American electorate: Democrats dominate in cities, while Republicans rule in rural areas. But as the presidential race has shown, the two parties are treating the voters in their opponents’ favored territory in very different ways.

Democrats are working to attract rural voters and promoting policy initiatives to improve life for rural Americans. Republicans are heaping contempt and calumny on cities and treating their residents as deluded.

Conservatives have long disdained urban areas and those who live in them. But as Election Day approaches, Donald Trump and JD Vance are deploying a particularly nasty anti-urban strategy, seemingly driven by the belief that if Americans who don’t live in cities — or ever go there — look upon them with disgust and fear, then they’ll vote Republican.

We’ve gotten used to Republicans describing our cities as repulsive and frightening for so long that it no longer strikes us as unusual.

In rural Pennsylvania last week, Vice President Kamala Harris’ running mate, Tim Walz, unveiled a policy plan to address some of the challenges faced by rural Americans. It includes an effort to hire 10,000 desperately needed health care professionals to work in rural areas. The day before, Vance traveled to Minneapolis, but not to offer the Trump-Vance plan for urban America. Instead, Vance insulted and demeaned the city, falsely claiming that Walz let it “burn to the ground” in 2020 during protests against police violence and that the city “has now become overrun with crime.” Vance warned that “the story of Minneapolis is coming to every community across the United States of America if we promote Kamala Harris to president of the United States.” Never mind that Minneapolis was named the happiest city in America this year, just one of its absurdly long list of accolades.

Vance’s strategy of insulting the city he was in mirrored Trump’s approach last week in Detroit, where the former president told an audience that “our whole country will end up being like Detroit” if Harris wins. In fact, Detroit is in the midst of a remarkable revival, with new economic development, plummeting crime rates and a population that is increasing for the first time in decades.

Imagine the thermonuclear freakout that would grip the entire political world if Harris or Walz went to, say, a rural Pennsylvania county, declared it a dystopia and its residents deranged, and warned darkly that the whole country would be gripped by that kind of rural horror if they didn’t win the election. They’d be pilloried for insulting the “heartland,” where “real Americans” supposedly live. Commentators of all ideological stripes would savage them for being so cruel to such a significant portion of the electorate. It would dominate coverage of the campaign for the rest of the election.

But we’ve gotten used to Republicans describing our cities as repulsive and frightening for so long that it no longer strikes us as unusual. When Trump says that in America’s cities, “you can’t walk across the street to get a loaf of bread. You get shot. You get mugged. You get raped,” it’s easy to dismiss the ham-handed hyperbole, but we know that millions of Americans believe it.

That’s because conservative media’s efforts to regularly portray cities as chaotic and more dangerous amplify a long anti-urban tradition in America that dates back to the nation’s founding. Thomas Jefferson believed the countryside was where all good things could be found, while cities were as disgusting as the people who lived there. “Those who labour in the earth are the chosen people of God, if ever he had a chosen people, whose breasts he has made his peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue,” Jefferson wrote in 1785. “The mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government, as sores do to the strength of the human body.”

In the picture Trump and Vance paint, every American city is in flames.

Conservatives have long portrayed cities as places of danger and corruption. Richard Nixon aired frightening ads focused on urban crime in his 1968 run for the White House. In 2016, Ted Cruz accused Trump of having “New York values” (he didn’t say exactly what those values were, but they had to be bad). Conservatives celebrated Jason Aldean’s song “Try That in a Small Town,” a warning to urbanites not to bring their crime and chaos to small towns.

As Republicans have secured their hold over rural areas in recent years, they have only increased the shade they throw at cities. Democrats, said Sen. Tom Cotton in 2022, “want to make you live in downtown areas, in high-rise buildings, and walk to work or take the subway.” (The horror!) “Serious question,” tweeted Vance the year before. “I have to go to New York soon and I’m trying to figure out where to stay. I have heard it’s disgusting and violent there. But is it like Walking Dead Season 1 or Season 4?”

For the record, New York is by some measures the safest big city in America. When he’s not in Washington, Vance lives in Cincinnati, a city of 300,000; he describes his posh neighborhood as “the perfect combo of proximity to the city and to nature.”

Yet in the picture Trump and Vance paint, every American city is in flames — and it’s no accident that they make constant reference to the protests against police brutality that swept the country in the wake of George Floyd’s murder in 2020. Though 98% of those protests saw no injuries and there was no property damage in 97%, Republicans would have you believe that entire cities burned to the ground, as Vance falsely claimed about Minneapolis. You don’t have to be steeped in scholarship on race to grasp the racial subtext to the GOP attack on urban America and the people who live there.

It might be easier to assume goodwill on Republicans’ part if, like Democrats, they actually seemed interested in finding more votes in cities. Instead, they sneer at urban areas and the Americans who live there, hoping to generate anti-urban disdain and fear that will win them votes elsewhere. Given that Republicans have lost the popular vote in seven of the last eight presidential elections, the evidence for this strategy’s success is thin at best. But whether it works this time or not, it’s one more iteration of Republicans’ larger strategy of winning through division. And it’s shameful.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

LATROBE, Pa. (AP) — Donald Trump’s campaign suggested he would begin previewing his closing argument Saturday night with Election Day barely two weeks away. But the former president kicked off his rally with a detailed story about Arnold Palmer, at one point even praising the late, legendary golfer’s genitalia.

Trump was campaigning in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, where Palmer was born in 1929 and learned to golf from his father, who suffered from polio and was head pro and greenskeeper at the local country club.

Advertisement

Politicians saluting Palmer in his hometown is nothing new. But Trump spent 12 full minutes doing so at the top of his speech and even suggested how much more fun the night would be if Palmer, who died in 2016, could join him on stage.

“Arnold Palmer was all man, and I say that in all due respect to women,” Trump said. “This is a guy that was all man.”

Then he went even further.

“When he took the showers with other pros, they came out of there. They said, ‘Oh my God. That’s unbelievable,’” Trump said with a laugh. “I had to say. We have women that are highly sophisticated here, but they used to look at Arnold as a man.”

Trump 10 minutes into his Arnold Palmer story: But when he took showers with the other pros, they came out of there. They said, oh my God. That's unbelievable. pic.twitter.com/kRLKWixpT8 — Acyn (@Acyn) October 19, 2024

Advertisement

Trump senior adviser Jason Miller told reporters before the speech that Trump planned to preview his closing argument against Vice President Kamala Harris and “start to get into that framing.” Candidates have traditionally used their final days on the campaign trail to sum up for the electorate why they deserve to win the White House.

Trump eventually hit many of his favorite campaign themes but didn’t offer much in the way of new framing of the race or why he should win it. He instead boasted of creating strong tax policies and a strong military during his first term in office.

He slammed Harris as “crazy” and added a profanity.

“You have to tell Kamala Harris that you’ve had enough, that you just can’t take it anymore, we can’t stand you anymore, you’re a s— vice president,” Trump said to roars of the crowd. “The worst. You’re the worst vice president. Kamala, you’re fired. Get the hell out of here.”

He also criticized Harris for suggesting during her unsuccessful run for president in 2020 that she’d support a ban on hydraulic fracking, which is important to Pennsylvania’s economy and a position Harris’ campaign says she no longer supports.

Trump: You’re a shit Vice President pic.twitter.com/cB2w7nknQM — Acyn (@Acyn) October 19, 2024

Advertisement

Trump invited on stage members of a local steelworkers union that endorsed him. He donned a construction hat with his name on it.

He also said Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called him amid Israeli’s ongoing war with Hamas in Gaza.

“He said, ‘It’s incredible what’s happened,’” Trump said of the Netanyahu call before moving to a criticism of President Joe Biden, saying that the Israeli prime minister “wouldn’t listen to Biden.”

Trump praised the raucous crowd, which was outside and at an airport, but also made a point of suggesting that there was more conspicuous security around him following two assassination attempts, saying, “They give you a little extra security nowadays, you notice?”

“I got more machine guns than I’ve ever seen ― look at these guys,” he said referring to security. He was interrupted by cries from the crowd of “USA! USA!” before continuing, “We’ve got more guys, and every one of them is like central casting too, holy s—.”

Advertisement

Then he tied it back to Latrobe’s native son, adding, “They look like Arnold. Can’t look better than Arnold.”

___
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

ATLANTA (AP) — Vice President Kamala Harris said Saturday that Republican former President Donald Trump was “cruel” for how he talked about the grieving family of a Georgia mother who died after waiting 20 hours for a hospital to treat her complications from an abortion pill, as she put combating restrictions on reproductive care at the center of her pitch to voters.

At a rally in Atlanta, Harris blamed Amber Thurman’s death on Georgia’s abortion restrictions that took effect after the Supreme Court in 2022, with three Trump-appointed justices, overturned Roe v. Wade. It comes as Harris is looking to the issue to propel support to Democrats, who have pledged to restore a national right to abortion if they win the White House and enough seats in Congress.

Advertisement

“Donald Trump still refuses to take accountability, to take any accountability, for the pain and the suffering he has caused,” Harris said.

Thurman’ story features at the center of one of Harris’ closing campaign ads, and her family attended her Atlanta rally, with her mother holding a photo of her daughter from the audience. Harris showed a clip of Trump saying during a recent Fox News Channel town hall, when he was asked about the Thurman family joining a separate media call, “We’ll get better ratings, I promise.”

“A grieving family, a grieving family, sharing the memory of their daughter with our nation. Where is the compassion?” she asked. “What we see continually from Donald Trump is exactly what that clip shows,” Harris added. “He belittles their sorrow, making it about himself and his television ratings. It is cruel.”

"He belittles their sorrow, making it about himself and his ratings" - Kamala Harris at her rally in Atlanta plays a video about Amber Thurman's death & the role Trump's abortion bans played in it, then plays a clip from Trump's Fox News town hall where he mocked Thurman's family pic.twitter.com/mmrruG0gd8 — Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) October 19, 2024

Advertisement

Before Harris became the Democratic nominee, Ian Summer, 19, planned on voting against Trump — but he wasn’t enthusiastic about President Joe Biden. Since Harris stepped into the race “she’s brought great energy,” Summer said. Summer is worried about restrictions on abortion access under Trump. “The fact that I could have a wife in the future that may not be able to receive the care that she needs, that’s a very scary thing,” he said.

Early voting is also underway in Georgia. More than 1.2 million ballots have been cast, either in person or by mail. Democrats hope an expansive organizing effort will boost Harris against Trump in the campaign’s final weeks. Harris referenced that former President Jimmy Carter recently voted by mail days after his 100th birthday.

“If Jimmy Carter can vote early, you can too,” Harris said.

Roderick Williams, 56, brought his three daughters to Harris’ Atlanta rally. His youngest daughter was born around the time former President Barack Obama entered office, and he hopes they can witness history again by seeing Harris become the first Black woman to be president.

“It’s important for them to see that anything’s possible,” Williams said.

Harris was joined at the rally by hometown music icon Usher, drawing again on star power as she looks to excite voters to the polls. Earlier Saturday she appeared with Lizzo on Saturday in the singer’s hometown of Detroit, marking the beginning of in-person voting and lavishing the city with praise after Trump recently disparaged it.

“All the best things were made in Detroit. Coney Dogs, Faygo and Lizzo,” the singer joked to a rally crowd, pointing to herself after listing off the hot dogs and soda that the city is famous for.

Advertisement

She said it was time to “put some respect on Detroit’s name” noting that the city had revolutionized the auto and music industries and adding that she’d already cast her ballot for Harris since voting early was “a power move.”

Heaps of praise for the Motor City came after Trump, the former president, insulted it during a recent campaign stop. And Harris continued the theme, saying of her campaign, “Like the people of Detroit, we have grit, we have excellence, we have history.”

Arms wide open as she took the stage, Harris let the crowd see she was wearing under her blazer a “Detroit vs. Everybody” T-shirt that the owner of the business that produces them gave her during a previous stop in the city earlier in the week. She also moved around the stage during her speech with a hand-held mic, not using a teleprompter.

More than 1 million Michigan residents have already voted by mail in the Nov. 5 election, and Harris predicted that Detroit turnout for early voting would be strong.

“Who is the capital of producing records?” Harris asked when imploring the crowd to set new highs for early voting tallies. “We are going to break some records here in Detroit today.”

Advertisement

She slammed Trump as unstable: “Somebody just needs to watch his rallies, if you’re not really sure how to vote.”

“We’re not going to get these 17 days back. On Election Day, we don’t want to have any regrets,” the vice president said.

Lizzo also told the crowd, “Mrs. Commander-in-Chief has a nice ring to it.”

“This is the swing state of all swing states, so every last vote here counts,” the singer said. Then, referencing her song of the same title, Lizzo added, “If you ask me if America is ready for its first woman president, I only have one thing to say: “It’s about damn time!”

Lizzo attends a campaign event for Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris at Western International High School in Detroit, Saturday, Oct. 19, 2024. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin) via Associated Press

Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Whatley said in a statement that Harris needed Lizzo “to hide the fact that Michiganders were feeling good under President Trump – real wages were higher, prices were lower, and everyone was better off.”

Advertisement

Talona Johnson, a product manager from Rochester, Michigan, attended Harris’ rally and said that Harris “and her team are doing the things that are required to make sure that people are informed.”

“I believe she’s telling the truth. She’s trying to help the people,” said Johnson, who said she planned to vote for Harris and saw women’s rights as her top concern.

“I don’t necessarily agree with everything that she’s put out, but she’s better than the alternative,”

In comments to reporters before the rally, Harris said she was in Detroit “to thank all the folks for the work they are doing to help organize and register people to vote, and get them out to vote today. She also called Detroit “a great American city” with “a lot of hard-working folks that have grit and ambition and deserve to be respected.”

The vice president was asked about whether the Biden administration’s full-throated support for Israel in its war with Hamas in Gaza might hurt her support in Michigan. Dearborn, near Detroit, is the largest city with an Arab majority in the nation.

Advertisement

“It has never been easy,” Harris said of Middle East policy. “But that doesn’t mean we give up.”

___
LOADING ERROR LOADING

GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. (AP) — Kamala Harris insisted it was time to “end the suffering” in the Middle East while Donald Trump visited one of the nation’s only Muslim-majority cities on Friday as the dueling presidential contenders fought for a small but pivotal bloc of Arab American voters in swing-state Michigan.

In a rare reference to Israel’s fight against Hamas and Hezbollah, Harris said, “This year has been very difficult, given the scale of death and destruction in Gaza and given the civilian casualties and displacement in Lebanon.” She said the death of Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar “can and must be a turning point.”

Advertisement

“Everyone must seize this opportunity to finally end the war in Gaza, bring the hostages home and end the suffering once and for all,” she said.

Trump, meanwhile, avoided any specifics about his plans for the Middle East, but he said he didn’t think the Arab American community would vote for Harris “because she doesn’t know what she’s doing.”

Later, he fought through technical glitches that silenced his microphone for almost 20 minutes at a rally in Detroit.

Former President Donald Trump taps the microphone as the audio goes out during a campaign event in Detroit, on Friday, Oct. 18, 2024. Carlos Osorio via Associated Press

Advertisement

Michigan is one of three “blue wall” states that, along with Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, will help decide the election on Nov. 5. Diverse voting blocs are key to winning virtually any swing state, but Michigan is unique with its significant Arab American population, which has been deeply frustrated by the Biden administration’s support for Israel’s offensive in Gaza following Hamas’ Oct. 7, 2023, attack on Israel.

Trump, who instituted a travel ban targeting Muslim countries while in office and has vowed to expand the ban to include refugees from Gaza if elected again, is trying to capitalize on the community’s frustration with the Democratic administration, despite his well-documented history of hostile rhetoric and policies.

There were modest signs Friday that he may be making progress.

The Republican nominee visited a new campaign office in Hamtramck, one of the nation’s only Muslim-majority cities, and was joined there by Mayor Amer Ghalib, a Democrat who has endorsed Trump. Meanwhile, three city council members in the same town have endorsed Harris.

“His visit today is to show respect and appreciation to our community,” said Ghalib, who presented Trump with a framed certificate of appreciation.

Trump’s allies have held meetings for months with community leaders in the state, which Biden carried by less than 3 points in 2020. Asked about the Hamtramck mayor’s endorsement, Trump said: “I mean, frankly, it’s an honor. I’ve got a lot of endorsements, Arab Americans, from a lot of people.”

Advertisement

Amer Ghalib, the mayor of Hamtramck, Michigan, introduces former President Donald Trump during a campaign office visit in Detroit on Oct. 18, 2024. Win McNamee via Getty Images

Trump has held 15 separate events in Michigan dating back to April, when Biden was still the presumed Democratic nominee. Including a scheduled Saturday event in Detroit, Harris will have visited Michigan 11 times since she became the nominee, according to AP tracking of the campaigns’ public events.

And while foreign policy rarely sways U.S. elections, the war in the Middle East is a critical concern for many of Michigan’s Arab American voters.

Trump said Sinwar “was not a good person” when asked about the Hamas leader’s death. Sinwar, one of the architects of the Oct. 7 attack, was killed Wednesday by Israelis.

“That’s my reaction. That’s sometimes what happens,” Trump told reporters at the airport in Detroit.

Even as he reached out to disillusioned Arab American voters, Trump suggested he would end efforts to encourage Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to restrain military operations that have killed tens of thousands of Palestinians.

Advertisement

Even though Biden “is trying to hold him back ... he probably should be doing the opposite, actually,” Trump said.

Harris highlighted her support from the Arab American community as well.

On Friday, 52 Lebanese Americans endorsed Harris and her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, saying in a letter that the voice of their community “will be heard” under the ticket’s leadership.

The letter reiterated calls for a cease-fire, and it cited a recent decision by the Department of Homeland Security to extend temporary legal status to Lebanese citizens in the U.S. Such status is made available to people from certain countries marred by war, turmoil or natural disasters.

Vice President Kamala Harris speaks about the killing of Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar during a statement to the press at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in Wisconsin, on Oct. 17, 2024. Saul Loeb/AFP via Getty Images

But Harris has also faced demonstrators protesting U.S. support of Israel in the conflict. During a closed-door meeting Thursday with students at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, she was confronted by a protester, according to a video posted by a pro-Palestinian student group on social media.

Advertisement

According to the video, as Harris was telling students she was invested in them, a protester interrupted her, asking, “And in genocide, right? Billions of dollars in genocide?”

A phalanx of Democratic governors — Maura Healey of Massachusetts, Wes Moore of Maryland, Tony Evers of Wisconsin, Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, Josh Shapiro of Pennsylvania and Kathy Hochul of New York — campaigned with Harris earlier Friday.

Longtime Michigan Sen. Debbie Stabenow, a Democrat, emphasized that the army of top Democrats descending on the state was not a sign of panic, stating, “We have to run like we’re behind.”

“A lot of people have always said we’re a blue state. She knows we’re not. And she’s not taking us for granted,” Stabenow told the AP ahead of a rally for Harris in Oakland County.

Both Trump and Harris also made a push for union workers and Black voters as they worked every angle for support.

Advertisement

At an appearance at the United Auto Workers Local 652 hall in Lansing, Harris offered a direct message to union members: “I will always have your back.”

She warned that Trump would undermine collective bargaining and worker protections.

“We’ve got to get the word out to all the brothers and sisters in labor to remind them what this dude does,” she said before the campaign played a clip of Trump saying it’s not hard to build a car. “We could have our child doing it,” he said.

Workers wait on stage for Vice President Kamala Harris during a campaign event at the United Auto Workers Local 652 at the Capital Region International Airport in Lansing, Michigan, October 18, 2024. Jeff Kowalsky/AFP via Getty Images

Meanwhile, Trump talked up his own support among labor unions and criticized the rise of electric cars during a rival event in Oakland County ahead of his evening rally in Detroit.

While visiting a campaign office, Trump said the head of the United Auto Workers — who has endorsed Harris — doesn’t have a clue.

Advertisement

“I’ve saved Michigan,” he said, telling the crowds he would bring back more manufacturing. “We’ll end up having those plants built over here instead of in other countries.”

Later, he called Teamsters President Sean O’Brien “a great guy.” O’Brien spoke at the Republican National Convention, and his union decided not to endorse Harris, which was viewed as a victory for Trump, given the union’s past support for Democrats.

“I think it’s been many decades before they endorsed a Republican. I think they’ll start very soon,” Trump said.

Trump’s Detroit event was his first there since insulting the city last week. While warning what will happen if Harris is elected, he said that “our whole country will end up being like Detroit.” The city spent years hemorrhaging residents and businesses, plunging into deep financial problems, before rebounding in recent years.

“We love Detroit,” Trump said Friday night as the crowd erupted. “We’re going to make Detroit great again.”

Advertisement

___
LOADING ERROR LOADING

JONESBORO, Ga. (AP) — Kamala Harris on Sunday summoned Black churchgoers to turn out at the polls and got a big assist from music legend Stevie Wonder, who rallied congregants with a rendition of Bob Marley’s “Redemption Song.”

Harris visited two Atlanta area churches as part of a nationwide push known as “souls to the polls.”

It’s a mobilization effort led by the National Advisory Board of Black Faith Leaders, which is sending representatives across battleground states to encourage early voting.

Advertisement

After services, buses took congregants straight to early polling places.

At both churches, Harris delivered a message about kindness and lifting people up rather than insulting them, trying to set up an implicit contrast with Republican Donald Trump’s brash style.

With just 16 days left until Election Day, Harris is running out of time to get across her message to a public still getting to know her after a truncated campaign.

“There is so much at stake right now,” she said at the Divine Faith Ministries International in Jonesboro. “We understand for us to do good works, it means to do it in the spirit of understanding that our strength is not based on who we beat down, as some would try to suggest. Our strength is based on who we lift up. And that spirit is very much at stake in these next 16 days.”

Kamala Harris got an assist from Stevie Wonder during a get out the vote event at Divine Faith Ministries International in Jonesboro, Georgia. Wonder sang "Happy Birthday" to the vice president, who turned 60 on Sunday. via Associated Press

Advertisement

Wonder led the crowd in singing his version of “Happy Birthday” to the vice president, who turned 60 on Sunday. When he was done, she appeared to choke up, saying, “I love you so much.”

Wonder grinned and said “don’t cry” before telling the crowd how important it was for people to get out and vote.

“We’re going to make the difference between yesterday and tomorrow,” he said.

Harris later said that she “had to check off a whole big one” on her bucket list because of Wonder singing her a birthday song, which prompted the singer to spring up and lead the congregation in a quick verse of ”Higher Ground.”

Pastor Donald Battle said of the election: “Georgia’s gonna be the state that turns it for the vice president.”

“Souls to the Polls” as an idea traces back to the Civil Rights Movement. The Rev. George Lee, a Black entrepreneur from Mississippi, was killed by white supremacists in 1955 after he helped nearly 100 Black residents register to vote in the town of Belzoni. The cemetery where Lee is buried has served as a polling place.

Advertisement

Black church congregations across the country have undertaken get-out-the-vote campaigns for years.

In part to counteract voter suppression tactics that date back to the Jim Crow era, early voting in the Black community is stressed from pulpits nearly as much as it is by candidates.

In Georgia, early voting began on Tuesday, and more than 310,000 people voted on that day, more than doubling the first-day total in 2020. A record 5 million people voted in the 2020 presidential election in Georgia.

Harris supporters listen as she speaks at Divine Faith Ministries International in Jonesboro, Georgia, on October 20, 2024. Megan Varner via Getty Images

Earlier Sunday, the Democratic presidential nominee attended New Birth Missionary Baptist Church in Stonecrest, where the congregation also sang “Happy Birthday.”

New Birth Pastor Jamal Bryant called the vice president “an American hero, the voice of the future” and “our fearless leader.” He also used his sermon to welcome the idea of America electing its first woman president, saying, “It takes a real man to support a real woman.”

Advertisement

“When Black women roll up their sleeves, then society has got to change,” Bryant said.

Harris referenced scripture as she promoted the importance of loving one’s neighbor, and then drew a contrast to the current political environment.

“In this moment, across our nation, what we do see are some who try to deepen division among us, spread hate, sow fear and cause chaos,” Harris told the congregation. “The true measure of the strength of a leader is based on who you lift up.”

One congregant who got a hug from Harris was 98-year-old Opal Lee, an activist who pushed to make Juneteenth a federally recognized holiday.

Harris is a Baptist. Her husband, Doug Emhoff, is Jewish. She has said she’s inspired by the work of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., and influenced by the religious traditions of her mother’s native India as well as the Black Church. Harris sang in the choir as a child at Twenty-Third Avenue Church of God in Oakland.

Her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, attended church in Saginaw, Michigan, and his wife, Gwen, headed to a service in Las Vegas.

Advertisement

Also Sunday, Harris sat for an interview with the Rev. Al Sharpton and was asked about the idea that she might see her support slipping among Black men — some of whom might be reluctant to vote for a woman for president.

Former President Barack Obama suggested that might be an issue during a recent campaign stop for Harris in Pittsburgh.

Harris said she had garnered support from many key Black male leaders, adding, “there’s this narrative about what kind of support we are receiving from Black men that is just not panning out in reality.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
CNN —

Donald Trump has pivoted to making his closing argument to voters heading into the final stretch of his race for the White House.

Or so his campaign said Saturday as the former president took the stage in Latrobe, Pennsylvania.

But shortly after walking out following a pro wrestler’s entrance music, Trump swiftly veered into a rambling anecdote about the late Arnold Palmer, the golfing legend after whom the local airport was named. The story, which seemed to serve little purpose beyond invoking a regional icon and which lasted nearly 15 minutes, included tangents on Palmer’s immense wealth and several offhand remarks about the Hall of Famer’s naked body.

“Arnold Palmer was all man, and I say that in all due respect to women, I love women. … This man was strong and tough, and I refused to say it, but when he took showers with the other pros they came out of there, they said ‘Oh, my God. That’s unbelievable,’” Trump said.

The anecdote prompted one rallygoer to comment, “I didn’t expect to hear that tonight.”

From there, Trump invited to the stage Antonio Brown, a former Pittsburgh Steeler star with a troubling legal background, called his Democratic opponent, Kamala Harris, a “sh*t vice president,” and attacked mail-in voting as screens urged his supporters to cast absentee ballots early.

Harris, asked about Trump’s comments by the Rev. Al Sharpton on Sunday in a clip from a taped interview on MSNBC’s “PoliticsNation,” said that “the American people deserve so much better.”

“That’s how I come at it. And to your point, the president of the United States must set a standard. Not only for our nation but understanding the standard that we as a nation must set for the world,” Harris said.

One of Palmer’s daughters, Peg Palmer Wears, told the Associated Press on Sunday that she thought Trump’s comments about the late golfer were a “poor choice of approaches to remembering my father, but what are you going to do?”

In between the vulgar and bizarre moments at Trump’s rally Saturday were glimpses of a closing pitch. Trump, reading from a teleprompter, told the crowd, “With your support, we’ll bring back our nation’s strength, dominance, prosperity and pride. … This will be America’s new golden age; 100 years from now the presidential election of 2024 will be looked upon as America’s greatest victory.”

At other junctures, though, Trump interrupted his written remarks just as he seemed about to deliver the heart of his campaign’s message, the kind that could be clipped for local Pittsburgh television stations to play on air.

“This election is a choice between whether we will have an incredible four more years of failure — such a horrible four years. Everything they touch turns to — ” Trump said, pausing.

The crowd yelled back the corresponding expletive.

The rally kicked off two days of appearances by Trump in Pennsylvania, a battleground that both campaigns have prioritized both on the airwaves and in their schedules. Trump on Saturday held a town hall outside of Philadelphia. He is also planning to attend the Pittsburgh Steelers game, and he stopped by a McDonald’s to work as a fry cook — a visit intended to troll Harris’ work experience at the Golden Arches.

Ahead of the Latrobe event, Trump’s campaign suggested the former president would begin to tailor his message to match the urgency of the moment and a contrast of the two candidates.

“Today’s remarks I do think are important because it’s the beginning of that framing,” said Jason Miller, a top adviser to Trump. His pitch will be delivered in full at a planned rally at Madison Square Garden in one week, Miller added.

There was little, though, to differentiate Trump’s remarks from dozens of speeches he has delivered over the course of the campaign. He railed against migrants and the mental competency of his opponents. He complained about the legal cases against him as an ex-president and the investigation into Russian election interference that dogged the early years of his presidency.

Saturday’s erratic display — performed in front of a smaller-than-usual crowd that lacked energy during the preprogram — comes on the heels of a series of recent appearances that have deviated from expectations.

Trump’s Friday rally in Detroit notably failed to fill the venue his campaign booked, and when he took the stage, the former president was interrupted by technical issues with his microphone. Trump stood awkwardly by the lectern waiting for it to get fixed and then vowed to stiff the contractor that provided the sound system.

Earlier in the week, Trump decided to stop fielding questions at a town hall after a member of his audience suffered a medical episode. Instead, he called out songs to be played over the sound system as he swayed and waved his arms on the stage and then left after 40 minutes without taking any more questions.

The incidents played into recent attacks from Harris and her allies, who have argued Trump has grown unhinged and less stable in the final days of the race. They have also seized on Trump’s decision to cancel high-profile interviews with “60 Minutes” and CNBC as evidence that the former president’s travel schedule has caught up to the 78-year-old former president.

Speaking in Detroit on Friday, Trump pushed back against the suggestion he has lost a step.

“I’ve gone 48 days now without a rest and I’ve got that loser who doesn’t have the energy of a rabbit,” he said.

The next day in Latrobe, he spoke for about an hour and 40 minutes — a public demonstration of his capacity to soldier on.

Still, Trump looked ahead to the moment when he could put his third White House bid in the rearview mirror.

“We’ve been through so much together, Trump said. “The finish line is finally in sight.”

This story has been updated with additional information.
Harris and Trump hold competing rallies in Michigan

toggle caption Spencer Platt/Getty Images

DETROIT/OAKLAND COUNTY, Mich. — With 17 days left until voting ends in the 2024 presidential election in a race that could not be closer, Donald Trump and Vice President Harris campaigned in a state where they emphasized the future of American manufacturing — and denigrated each others’ fitness for office.

While the two candidates have been crisscrossing the swing states for weeks, this is the first time they are literally crossing paths, with each of them holding events in the suburbs north of Detroit. Early voting in Michigan, one of seven swing states that are pivotal to the two candidates' path to the White House, begins Saturday in Detroit and will expand to the rest of the state by Oct. 26.

Sponsor Message

At a rally on the banks of a river in Grand Rapids, Mich., Friday afternoon, Harris said that Trump “makes big promises and he always fails to deliver.” Grand Rapids is the seat of Kent County, home to former Republican President Gerald Ford and a traditional Republican stronghold that Democrats managed to win last cycle. The community is seen as a bellwether for the state.

“Remember he said he was the only one, you know how he talks, the only one who could bring back America’s manufacturing jobs?” Harris said. “Then America lost almost 200,000 American manufacturing jobs when he was president — facts — including tens of thousands of jobs right here in Michigan.”

toggle caption Win McNamee/Getty Images

Trump, at an economic roundtable campaign event in Oakland County, heard from small-business owners and police officers about what they said were the deteriorating state of their communities.

After a winding preamble that touched on the idea of a crime summit in Venezuela and mocked former Republican Sen. Pat Toomey’s opposition to tariffs for limiting free trade, Trump concluded the roundtable by complimenting a man in a Teamsters shirt and said, “We’re going to bring back a lot of industries and it is going to be great.”

Sponsor Message

Oakland County was once a Republican stronghold, but has voted for Democrats since 1996. Harris’ campaign sees room to grow there by expanding support among college-educated voters and women disenchanted with Trump.

Later, Trump’s rally in Detroit was plagued by technical difficulties. His mic cut out and he paced the stage for about 20 minutes before the sound was restored. In his remarks, Trump said that under his administration the U.S. “will reclaim its stolen wealth and the days of its economic glory will return greater and stronger than ever before.” It was a departure from his previous remarks about the city when he said last week: “Our whole country will end up being like Detroit if she's (Harris) your president." Those remarks drew widespread backlash in the region.



Manufacturing was the topic — but mental fitness got the headlines

Both candidates found time to lob criticisms at each other over their perceived fitness for office.

Harris said Trump was “ducking debates and canceling interviews,” citing news stories citing unnamed Trump aides saying he was exhausted. “Well, if you are exhausted on the campaign trail, it raises real questions about if you are fit for the toughest job in the world,” she said.

In response, Trump gave a fiery defense of his schedule, saying he was “exhilarated” and slamming Harris as “not a smart person.”

In Lansing, Harris campaigned with union workers, listing auto plant closures that happened during the Trump administration, and noting a Biden administration grant that had saved about 650 auto jobs in Lansing .

Harris underscored that Trump’s running mate JD Vance had called that grant “table scraps” during a recent campaign stop in Detroit.

She played a highlight reel of negative Trump comments about the United Autoworkers.

“We got to get the word out to all of the brothers and sisters in labor and remind them of what this dude does, right — what he actually does,” Harris said.

Sponsor Message

“Union workers are not part of his club. Let's be clear about that. No matter what he does at his rallies,” she said. “He thinks that the value of your work is essentially meaningless.”
Donald Trump’s 2024 campaign rhetoric echoes the racist screeds written by white supremacist mass shooters; the chants of the tiki torch-wielding neo-Nazis who marched in Charlottesville, Virginia; and the disgusting, profoundly false theses penned by eugenicists and so-called race scientists.

Although he launched his successful 2016 bid for the White House by labeling Mexican immigrants “rapists” and calling for a ban on Muslims entering the U.S., the severity of the GOP presidential nominee’s rhetoric this election season marks an escalation — one that has seen some political observers, once hesitant to call Trump a “fascist,” suddenly more at ease with the label.

Advertisement

“People were very careful early on not to compare him to Hitler, and to not use the term ‘fascist,’ because people thought it was an exaggeration,” Ernesto Castañeda, a professor at American University who directs The Immigration Lab and the Center for Latin American and Latino Studies, told HuffPost.

“When he was in power, it was not a fascist regime, but his campaign rhetoric right now — the rally [that] took place in Aurora, Colorado, I listened to the whole thing, and it could have been a Nazi speech from a reel in English. The people shouting, the people saying hateful things and the crowd going crazy. He had clips of incidents with immigrants committing crimes, running one after the other, from different media sources, credible and otherwise. It was really, really emotional. Really, really trying to move somebody that wasn’t informed.”

A dispatch from The New York Times described Trump’s anti-immigrant campaign speech in the Denver suburb of 400,000 on Oct. 11 :

Mr. Trump repeated claims, which have been debunked by local officials, that Aurora had been “invaded and conquered,” described the United States as an “occupied state,” called for the death penalty “for any migrant that kills an American citizen” and revived a promise to use the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 to deport suspected members of drug cartels and criminal gangs without due process.

Such rhetoric has become boilerplate in Trump speeches, interviews and social media posts. In recent months the former president has called for immigrants in the U.S. to undergo “remigration,” a well-known euphemism for mass deportations with links to European fascist movements. His use of the term corresponds with his campaign promise to expel millions of immigrants from the country once in office.

Trump, with support from his next-gen authoritarian running mate, Sen. JD Vance, has also pushed the lie that Haitian migrants in Springfield, Ohio, are eating their neighbors’ pets — a baseless, thoroughly debunked accusation, previously promoted in the state by a neo-Nazi group, that recalls historical fascist narratives depicting marginalized groups as savages. (Such anti-Haitian racism was especially pronounced among American white supremacists in the 1990s, with former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke insisting Haitians should not be allowed in the country because they were not of “European descent.”)

Trump has also said that many immigrants — a group largely composed of Black and brown people — are “murderers,” claiming that they are immutably, biologically criminal.

“Many of them murdered far more than one person, and they’re now happily living in the United States,” he said during an appearance on “The Hugh Hewitt Show” earlier this month. “You know, now a murderer, I believe this, it’s in their genes. And we got a lot of bad genes in our country right now. They left, they had 425,000 people come into our country that shouldn’t be here, that are criminals.”

Aside from the statistics Trump was misleadingly citing to criticize Democrat Joe Biden’s presidency, his argument that these immigrants have “bad genes” echoes some of the most vile eugenics and race science pushed throughout American history to give systemic racism an academic sheen — and to justify horrifying policies like mass sterilization.

Advertisement

And when it comes to next month’s presidential election, Trump has said Jewish voters will be to blame if he loses, as will noncitizens fraudulently casting ballots.

The latter accusation is at the heart of Trump’s apparent plan to deny the results of the election if his Democratic rival, Kamala Harris, is declared the winner. For months, he and the GOP have been laying the groundwork to blame a loss on immigrants — a claim reminiscent of the white supremacist “great replacement” conspiracy theory, which maintains that Black and brown immigrants, often at the behest of Jews, are flooding into America and Europe to “replace” white people. The theory has helped inspire multiple mass shootings in recent memory — including in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; El Paso, Texas; and Buffalo, New York — and was the basis for the infamous chant at 2017’s deadly neo-Nazi rally in Charlottesville: “You will not replace us!”

According to journalist Bob Woodward’s book “War,” retired Army Gen. Mark Milley, who served as chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Trump and Biden, has called Trump a “total fascist.”

“He is the most dangerous person ever,” Milley told Woodward. “I had suspicions when I talked to you about his mental decline and so forth, but now I realize he’s a total fascist. He is the most dangerous person to this country. ... A fascist to the core!”

Now, with less than three weeks to go until the election, Trump is signaling that he’ll escalate his rhetoric further, according to a report in Rolling Stone.

Advertisement

The outlet wrote:

In recent conversations with close allies, the former and perhaps future president has stressed that he can’t — as some advisers apparently would like him to — play it safe in these final weeks of campaigning, two people familiar with the matter tell Rolling Stone. “That’s how you lose,” Trump told one small huddle of these allies, one of the sources relays, as he emphasized that, especially on immigration, he needs to slam his foot on the gas.

Academics like Castañeda, who have studied genocides to examine how speech can lead to violence, are ringing the alarm bells about Trump. “You just need a few individuals to take him at his word and actually act on it for people to be hurt,” he told HuffPost.

Castañeda pointed to the El Paso shooting in 2019, when a white supremacist opened fire at a Walmart, killing over 20 people in a massacre that amounted to one of the deadliest anti-Hispanic hate crimes in U.S. history. Although it’s difficult to draw a direct line between Trump’s rhetoric and the massacre, the shooting occurred during a time of intensifying right-wing rhetoric, spearheaded by Trump and Fox News, depicting immigrants at the border as “invaders.”

“So that ideology in the speeches of Donald Trump and the actions of people that actually have done mass shootings, they are all connected,” Castañeda said. “They are all in the same circle. They are talking to each other. And they have more or less the same goal of having or assessing power and keeping some group in power, and making sure that the other groups are deported, secluded, put in concentration camps — which Trump has openly said he will do — or that at least they don’t have any more ascendancy, influence or political power in the U.S.”

Advertisement

Susan Benesch, a director of the Dangerous Speech Project nonprofit and a faculty associate at Harvard University’s Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society, said it’s often a mischaracterization to call rhetoric like Trump’s “hate speech.”

“If you are trying to understand what makes people dangerously angry at another group of people, it’s not hatred; it’s fear,” Benesch said. “Hatred is, in fact, hard to define. Fear is not hard to define at all, and fear, very importantly, is connected to biological responses in the human body. When people are afraid, they have physiological responses to that.”

“So, for example, telling your supporters that other people are eating pets is absolutely brilliant, because one of the generalizations you can make about human beings is … that they care enormously about pets,” she said.

But what political advantage does Trump gain by using such rhetoric?

“He presents himself as the only savior, the only solution,” Benesch said. “He says all these people, and lists them at different times — Muslims, Haitians, Mexicans, Democrats, Democratic leadership, the deep state — all of these awful people are trying to hurt you badly. And the only solution is me. He says this all the time — ‘Only I can protect you.’ … So the formula is: Here’s this terrible, terrible, horrible threat, be extremely afraid, and now the only way out, the only solution to this horrifying threat is me. So then, of course, you’ve got to vote for him.”

And then some of his supporters will likely go further than voting. Trump’s invitation to his followers to a Jan. 6, 2021, rally in Washington, D.C., included his now-infamous words, “Be there, will be wild!” But there had been months of “threat construction” before that, Benesch said. Trump depicted the 2020 presidential election as stolen by the so-called deep state and a host of other perceived enemies who posed an existential threat to the “Make America Great Again” faithful, driving his supporters to call for the hanging of then-Vice President Mike Pence and to hunt the halls of Congress looking for prominent Democrats.

Advertisement

Part of what makes Trump so dangerous, Benesch said, is the sprawling right-wing media ecosystem that works overtime to fine-tune his fascist talking points — and to spread them far and wide. She often points to how during the tribunal after the Rwandan genocide, two prominent radio executives and a newspaper editor were taken to court for their responsibility in fomenting the mass killing.

“[A] witness was asked, ‘What did these men do to bring about the genocide?’ since they hadn’t, as far as anybody knew, touched a machete. And the witness said, ‘They dribbled petrol little by little all over the country, so that one day you could strike a match and it would burst into flame,’” Benesch said.

“This is a very important point that is often missed in discussions about inflammatory rhetoric that nobody is exposed to it just once — they get exposed to it over and over and over and over and over, and eventually a human mind can be soaked in petrol, and then that person is ready to burst into a violent response.”

A recent poll by the Public Religion Research Institute found that a large swath of the American public is susceptible to authoritarianism, with many open to the idea of political violence.

“Our new survey finds that four in ten Americans are susceptible to authoritarian appeals, and that number rises to two-thirds of Republicans and white evangelical Protestants,” Robert P. Jones, PRRI’s president and founder, said in a press release. “Notably, while the vast majority of Americans reject the use of political violence, those who support authoritarianism are nearly twice as likely as the general public to support it.”

Advertisement
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Dominion Voting Systems released a pointed statement Saturday following remarks from billionaire Elon Musk and Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-Ga.), who have reiterated debunked conspiracy theories that the 2020 election was stolen from Republican nominee Donald Trump.

The electronic voting machine company reached a record-breaking settlement last year after suing Fox News for spreading disproven claims that its machines had facilitated ballot fraud in 2020. Dominion said Saturday that it is “closely monitoring claims around the 2024 election” that echo those allegations.

Advertisement

“We strongly encourage people to rely upon verified, credible sources of election information - sources that can explain the many layers of physical, operational, and technical safeguards that exist to protect the integrity of our elections,” Dominion wrote in its statement.

“We remain fully prepared to defend our company and our customers against lies, and to seek accountability from those who spread them,” the company added.

Musk has thrown his full weight behind Trump. He promoted the false assertion that Dominion manipulated the election in 2020 at his first solo event to support Trump’s campaign on Thursday, insinuating without proof that “some very strange things” happened to people’s votes.

“When you have mail-in ballots and no proof of citizenship, it becomes almost impossible to prove cheating, is the issue,” Musk said at a Pennsylvania town hall.

Advertisement

“There’s always this question of, say, the Dominion voting machines,” Musk continued. “It is weird that, I think, they were used in Philadelphia and in Maricopa County [in Arizona] but not in a lot of other places. Doesn’t that seem like a heck of a coincidence?”

Dominion — which also sued former Trump attorneys Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell, along with other TV networks like Newsmax, for making defamatory claims about its machines — reacted strongly to Musk’s comments in a separate statement Friday to multiple media outlets.

“Fact: Dominion does not serve Philadelphia County,” the statement said. “Fact: Dominion’s voting systems are already based on voter verified ballots. Fact: Hand counts and audits of such paper ballots have repeatedly proven that Dominion machines produce accurate results.

“These are not matters of opinion. They are verifiable facts.”

Separately, Greene — known for conspiratorial rhetoric, like her recent assertion that a shady “they” can “control the weather” — appeared on Alex Jones’ InfoWars network on Friday, where she claimed that a Dominion machine “changed” the ballot of a voter in her district. (Early voting began in Georgia in the 2024 presidential election earlier this week.)

Musk held his first solo event in support of Trump and his campaign Thursday in Pennsylvania. Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images

Advertisement

An update on Dominion’s website Saturday clarified that officials from the county in question, Georgia’s Whitfield County, determined “voter error” was to blame in this particular instance and resolved the issue with the voter. The company reasserted that claims that its machines can change votes have “been repeatedly debunked.”

Election officials, courts and Trump’s own administration have failed to produce evidence of widespread fraud in the 2020 election. But promoting false claims that Democrats cheated and will cheat again is nonetheless a feature of Trump’s campaign.
There is one question that dominates every political conversation and every group chat in Democratic enclaves across America, and it’s not “Will Kamala Harris win the election?” It’s “How is Donald Trump this close to winning?”

Some of this concern is typical in every modern election. Republicans radiate confidence while Democrats fret. Political science also provides a simple answer to Trump’s continued popularity. We live in a narrowly divided country where Republicans traditionally vote for Republican candidates — and the same goes for Democrats. Every modern election is relatively close. Incumbent parties around the world and across the political spectrum have struggled after the pandemic and related inflation increases.

For many Democrats, Trump’s continued viability as a presidential candidate speaks to something more fundamental and concerning.

Emotionally, however, this is hardly a satisfactory answer. For many Democrats, Trump’s continued viability as a presidential candidate speaks to something more fundamental and concerning: How can someone as odious and malignant as Trump maintain so much popular support?

It’s not just that Trump’s four years in office were defined by unimaginable incompetence, venality, chaos and cruelty. It’s not just that he is a convicted felon who spurred an insurrection and still refuses to accept the results of the 2020 election. It’s not just that many Democrats can’t comprehend why anyone would want to return to those days.

The larger and more disquieting issue is the campaign Trump is running right now: one that is as vile and as openly racist as any campaign in perhaps all of American history — and that includes his previous runs for the White House.

Virtually Trump’s entire message to voters this year is about the alleged threat represented by immigrants — both legal and illegal. A recent review of his speeches by Politico summarized them this way: “Trump has demonized minority groups and used increasingly dark, graphic imagery to talk about migrants in every one of his speeches since the Sept. 10 presidential debate.”

More than ever, Trump’s rhetoric is steeped in racism, xenophobia and dehumanization. He routinely calls immigrants “vermin” and says they are “poisoning the blood” of the country. He claims they are “stone-cold killers,” “animals” and “the worst people” who will “cut your throat.” (This is, unsurprisingly, not true. Crime rates among immigrants are lower than those among native-born Americans.) Last week in Colorado, he called migrants from Latin America, Congo and the Middle East “the most violent people on Earth.” He also accused Harris of importing “an army of illegal alien gang members and migrant criminals from the dungeons of the Third World … to prey upon innocent American citizens.” He’s even suggested that nonwhite immigrants have “bad genes” that make them genetically inferior.

This is fascist rhetoric. More specifically, it’s Nazi rhetoric. But the crowds at Trump’s rallies aren’t horrified by such language. They lap it up.

Is this really what America has become?

Trump is openly trafficking in racial fear and paying little political price for doing so. The centerpiece of Trump’s immigration policy is a call for massive detention camps and the mass deportation of illegal migrants. At this summer’s Republican National Convention, the GOP printed up and distributed thousands of signs to the assembled delegates that read “Mass Deportation Now.” Trump has even suggested that migrants who are in the country legally must be deported — like the Haitian migrants in Springfield, Ohio, whom he has repeatedly and falsely accused of eating dogs and cats.

There are surely voters who take Trump seriously but not literally — and refuse to believe he will follow through on his rhetoric. But when Trump was president, his administration initiated a policy of forcibly separating young children from their parents as a tool for deterring illegal immigration. And even if Trump doesn’t mean it now, why would these voters want to associate themselves with language not dissimilar from actual Nazis?

It’s not just Trump’s language about immigrants that is so troubling. I’m old enough to remember when George H.W. Bush calling his opponents “bozos” in 1992 was considered untoward. Hillary Clinton was vilified for referring to half of Trump’s supporters as “deplorable.” Now, Trump regularly refers to his political opponents as “an enemy within.” He has talked about taking “retribution” against Democrats, whom he calls “evil.” In recent days, he’s even suggested he would unleash the U.S. military on his political rivals.

Trump’s ability to carry out such threats might be constrained by the courts and even the military’s own unwillingness to conduct illegal domestic operations. But that hardly seems like a risk worth taking.

Yet the bigger danger of a Trump campaign is that so many Americans will go to the polls and validate Trump’s bigotry, violent rhetoric and divisiveness. For more than a few Democrats, the lack of political backlash from comments that would spell the end of any other presidential campaign is, as much as the tight polling margin, what has made this presidential campaign so uniquely unsettling. Is this really what America has become?

Many Democrats would have viewed the election of John McCain in 2008 or Mitt Romney in 2012 as disastrous events, but hardly ones that made them question the sustainability of the American experiment in representative democracy. A Trump victory would represent something very different — the endorsement of a national ethos that runs utterly contrary to the arc of modern American history, which has imperfectly bent toward justice.

Even if Trump loses, he will still likely get 45%-47% of the popular vote. How does America move forward when so many of our fellow citizens embrace a candidate and a message so fundamentally un-American? Defeating Trump is obviously essential, but as this presidential election, like the two before it, has made clear, America is a very different place than many of us imagined.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

DETROIT ― Donald Trump held a rally here Friday night, promising to rescue the city he has recently held up as a symbol of American decline.

It was in many ways a typical Trump speech before adoring supporters, most of whom waited hours in line to attend.

Advertisement

The Republican presidential nominee started out reciting his standard stump speech, touching on policy areas such as trade and immigration. Then, somewhere around the 50-minute mark — and following a roughly 20-minute interruption when the center’s microphones failed — he began what he has started calling his “weave,” wandering off into other topics and pausing to introduce local celebrities.

But the former president was speaking at the Huntington Place, the downtown convention hall that played a central role in Trump’s efforts to contest Michigan’s votes in the 2020 election.

And that was just one of the ways the site gave Friday’s event a unique flavor.

Donald Trump, at a campaign rally Friday at Huntington Place in Detroit, said “It will be economic Armageddon for Detroit” if he doesn't win in November. JIM WATSON/AFP via Getty Images

The speech was barely a week removed from Trump’s last appearance in the city, at the Detroit Economic Club, where he warned that the city’s problems with crime, poverty and unemployment were an example of what would happen if Democrats hold power after the November election.

Advertisement

“Our whole country will end up being like Detroit if she’s your president,” Trump said at that event, referring to Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic nominee. “You’re going to have a mess on your hands.”

The comments drew rebukes from officials and civic leaders, who pointed to widely acknowledged signs of a rebounding city, including declines in crime and unemployment rates. Even some Trump allies questioned whether insulting the biggest city in the key swing state made sense politically.

Trump on Friday didn’t try to walk back his comments. But he did give them more of a positive spin by saying he would help the city regain the wealth and stature it had after World War II, when it was flush with money from its thriving auto industry.

“We’ll be talking about the Michigan miracle,” Trump said, adding later, “I will put Detroit first, I will put Michigan first and I will put America first, and that’s the way it is.”

Audience members, many of them waving official “Make Detroit great again” placards, cheered.

Trump suggested he would accomplish this through two main policy levers: his proposal for across-the-board tariffs and his vow to end what he calls the “electric vehicle mandate,” the combination of federal subsidies and tighter emission standards Democrats have enacted in order to promote the clean energy industry.

Advertisement

“It will be economic Armageddon for Detroit,” Trump said, referring to those Democratic policies.

Trump’s analysis undoubtedly resonates with many voters, especially in the industrial Midwest, where competition unleashed by free trade led so many U.S. manufacturers to shutter or move operations overseas.

But economists from across the ideological spectrum have warned that the size and scope of Trump’s proposed tariffs could make them unusually damaging to the economy. Among other things, these economists say, the tariffs would effectively function as a tax that raises prices of everyday the goods ― which is the opposite of what Trump is promising to do.

Auto industry analysts, for their part, have warned that the clean energy subsidies Trump has vowed to halt are underwriting a factory-building boom across the South and Midwest ― and that, without direct government support, U.S. carmakers could actually lose their chance to compete in the growing global market for more fuel-efficient vehicles.

The debate over the future of the auto industry is especially important in Michigan, whose electoral votes are critical to both candidates’ strategies. That helps explain why Harris was also in Michigan on Friday and included on her itinerary a visit to a United Auto Workers union hall in Lansing, where a federal grant will help upgrade an assembly plant in order to produce electric vehicles.

But Detroit and the auto industry were just one focus of Trump’s speech.

Trump also reprised familiar arguments about undocumented immigrants, calling America an “occupied country.”

Advertisement

And near the end of his speech, he attacked Democrats for their support of transgender rights. To do that, he showed a video — one of several clips he aired during the speech — juxtaposing scenes from “Full Metal Jacket,” a 1987 war movie, with videos of drag influencers on social media.

Trump’s speech took place in a cavernous meeting hall, literally steps away from where ballot counters tallied votes from the 2020 presidential election. As that process unfolded, Trump supporters came to the hall and staged angry protests, making unfounded accusations of ballot fraud.

Federal prosecutor Jack Smith’s indictment against Trump, accusing him of conspiring to overturn a valid election, claims 2020 campaign officials encouraged those protests. Trump’s current campaign team has said those accusations are false.

But neither Trump nor his supporters are anywhere close to acknowledging that the 2020 election was legitimately won by Joe Biden.

Before Trump took the stage, as supporters were filing in and taking their seats, giant screens played a pair of campaign videos: one urging supporters to “swamp” the election with their votes because Democrats would supposedly try to steal the election, another railing against the supposed injustice of the criminal prosecutions against him.

Advertisement

The vibe overall was a bit mild by the standards of Trump rallies, with little of the festival atmosphere that frequently accompanies his appearances.

The crowd appeared to number in the low thousands, though official estimates were not immediately available. It was also overwhelmingly white, in a city where roughly three-quarters of the population is Black.

There was plenty of standing room in the back, plus empty chairs scattered throughout. Prior to the speech, campaign workers were offering people in the back a chance to sit on the risers behind the stage.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

As the U.S. closes in on what will likely be the most consequential election for abortion care in recent history, pro-choice advocates are setting their sights on a specific voting bloc: Republicans.

Ten states, half of which are GOP strongholds, have abortion-related amendments on their ballots. Protecting statewide access to abortion care will require voters to break with some of their party leaders.

Advertisement

And that could certainly happen. In 2022, just months after the Supreme Court repealed Roe v. Wade, voters protected abortion care in every state where the issue was on the ballot. It was true in Kentucky, a deep-red state, and even a year later in Ohio, a state notorious for some of the most extreme anti-choice legislation in the country. This year, ballot measures in Florida, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska and South Dakota will face the same test.

Except for Montana, all five states have enacted extreme abortion bans since the fall of Roe. Missouri and South Dakota have near-total abortion bans, while Florida’s six-week restriction was the final nail in the proverbial coffin for abortion access across the Southeast. Though the states are Republican strongholds, it doesn’t necessarily mean that their voters are overwhelmingly anti-abortion.

“Someone may want to vote for Donald Trump, or they have voted in 2022 for Ron DeSantis, but that doesn’t mean that they agree with them on every issue – and abortion is a great example of that,” Lauren Brenzel, director for Florida’s Yes On 4 campaign, said during a press call earlier this week.

In Florida, where Republicans outnumber Democrats by over 1 million, a summer poll showed former President Donald Trump leading Vice President Kamala Harris while nearly 70% of those same respondents supported the pro-choice ballot measure.

Advertisement

It’s odd, given the fact Trump has a long anti-abortion history and has long waffled over whether he would enact a national abortion ban if elected. But abortion ballot campaign leaders are confident that voters’ views on abortion are more nuanced and less partisan than the political two-party system would have us believe.

“Ballot measures really enable voters to isolate a particular issue and the values that they hold around that issue, and maintain their other partisan identities,” Kelly Hall, executive director of the Fairness Project, said in the same press call. The Fairness Project is one of the largest funders of pro-choice measures this year, committing over $30 million to supporting abortion rights campaigns.

“Ballot measures really enable voters to isolate a particular issue and the values that they hold around that issue, and maintain their other partisan identities.” - Kelly Hall, The Fairness Project

Nearly all of the pro-choice groups in red states are running nonpartisan campaigns, but they have strategies for winning over Republican voters. More and more, their talking points center on personal liberties and freedom to bridge the gap for voters who may identify as conservative or independent — an approach that was successful in Kansas in 2022.

And while the messaging is largely the same, the messenger looks a bit different.

“We have been working with a lot of clergy and faith leaders who we know are supportive of Amendment 3,” Rachel Sweet, the campaign manager for Missourians for Constitutional Freedom, said on the same call.

Advertisement

Sweet described faith leaders as strong messengers in more conservative circles because they “really serve as ambassadors and validators for the campaign to audiences who might not be as receptive to hearing from quote-unquote an abortion rights organization or an abortion rights campaign.”

In Florida, Brenzel and her team are planning to host a statewide phone bank where physicians will call constituents to discuss the impact of Florida’s six-week abortion ban. In an ad campaign, the group highlighted stories from a Republican physician and even a Catholic doctor who is personally opposed to abortion but doesn’t support the government being involved in her medical practice.

Clergy members and Republican physicians may be odd bedfellows for abortion rights campaigns, but they could be the key to winning — especially in an election season marred by mis- and disinformation. All five Republican states with abortion rights amendments have seen rampant misinformation campaigns created by anti-abortion advocates or the state’s very own government.

To combat misinformation, abortion ballot campaigns are simply telling the truth. Many groups are using the power of storytelling at rallies and in ad campaigns, including in Florida, where a woman needed an abortion for life-extending care after a cancer diagnosis, and in Missouri, where a woman needed miscarriage care after an ectopic pregnancy.

“There are a lot of Missourians, especially folks who may be more conservative, who would never see themselves as someone who would choose to have an abortion, but they might be able to see themselves as someone who has struggled with a miscarriage,” Sweet said.

Advertisement

Ten states, half of which are GOP strongholds, have abortion-related amendments on their ballots. Abortion ballot campaign leaders are confident that voters’ views on abortion are more nuanced and less partisan than the political two-party system would have us believe. via Associated Press

Nebraska is particularly interesting because it’s the only state with competing abortion measures — one measure that would codify the state’s current 12-week abortion ban and another that would restore abortion access up until a pregnancy reaches fetal viability. Ashlei Spivey, the campaign leader for Nebraska’s pro-abortion rights initiative, told reporters in another call this week that the opposition intentionally crafted their amendment to look similar to the pro-choice measure in hopes of confusing voters.

The abortion opposition campaign has gone so far as to trick voters into signing a petition that qualified the anti-choice measure for the ballot. “Folks that were [petitioning] for the anti-abortion measure would say to people, ‘Do you believe in pro-choice or pro-life?’ And whatever they said, ‘Oh, this is the ballot for you,’ and they would sign,” Spivey said. At least 300 Nebraskans requested the state remove their signatures from the anti-abortion ballot petition.

“We are not trying to convince voters of something that they don’t already believe. Our job is to make sure that voters know these extreme abortion bans impact their friends, their family, their loved ones and possibly even themselves,” Sweet said.

“You can still identify as a conservative or Republican, an independent — however you see yourself,” she continued. “You can still be that and acknowledge that in states like Missouri, politicians have gone too far, and there is a solution for us to take back power and end bans like we’ve seen in Missouri.”

Advertisement
Trump is promising deportations under the Alien Enemies Act of 1798. What is it?

toggle caption Alex Brandon/AP

Former President Donald Trump, whose bid for the White House has been dominated by his increasingly hardline anti-immigration rhetoric , is vowing to use an obscure, centuries-old law to expedite the removal of undocumented migrants from the U.S.

“I will invoke the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 to target and dismantle every migrant criminal network operating on American soil,” he said at a recent rally in California , one of several in which he has brought it up.

Trump is promising that, if reelected, he will use the act to initiate a federal effort called “ Operation Aurora ” — named after the Colorado town that he claims has been taken over by Venezuelan gangs, which residents and local officials dispute — to target undocumented migrant gang members for arrest and deportation.

Sponsor Message

He has also suggested that the act could be used to end sanctuary cities , which limit cooperation with federal immigration authorities, telling Fox News’ Harris Faulkner that “we can do things in terms of moving people out.”

The Alien Enemies Act is featured in more than just Trump’s stump speech.

It’s also name-checked in the Republican Party’s official 2024 platform , which says it will invoke the law to “remove all known or suspected gang members, drug dealers, or cartel members from the United States, ending the scourge of Illegal Alien gang violence once and for all.”

The act has gotten relatively little attention, let alone use, in the more than 200 years it’s been on the books, as Trump acknowledged.

“Those were the old days, when they had tough politicians,” he told a crowd of supporters in Arizona . “Think of that, 1798. Oh, it’s a powerful act. You couldn’t pass something like that today.”

So what exactly does the act do, and how likely is Trump to be able to use it as promised?



What’s the purpose of the Alien Enemies Act?

The Alien Enemies Act specifically allows the president to detain, relocate, or deport non-citizens from a country considered an enemy of the U.S. during wartime:

Sponsor Message

“Whenever there shall be a declared war between the United States and any foreign nation or government … and the President of the United States shall make public proclamation of the event, all natives, citizens, denizens, or subjects of the hostile nation or government, being males of the age of fourteen years and upwards, who shall be within the United States, and not actually naturalized, shall be liable to be apprehended, restrained, secured and removed, as alien enemies.”

Congress, with the support of President John Adams, passed the Alien Enemies Act as part of the four Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798 as the U.S. stood on the brink of war with France.

“There was a lot of fear-mongering about French supporters in the United States and about conspiracies to basically get the United States in on France's side,” explains Georgetown University Law Center professor Steve Vladeck.

The controversial group of laws severely curtailed civil liberties, including by tightening restrictions on foreign-born Americans and limiting speech critical of the government.

After President Thomas Jefferson was elected in 1800, he either repealed or allowed most of the acts to expire , except for the Alien Enemies Act, which does not have an expiration date.

It not only remained on the books but continued to expand in scope: Congress amended it in 1918 to include women.



When has the act been used before?

toggle caption HUM Images/Universal Images Group via Getty Images

The Alien Enemies Act has been used three times in American history, all in connection with major military conflicts.

During the War of 1812 , all British nationals living in the U.S. were required to report information including their age, length of time in the country, place of residence, family description and whether they had applied for naturalization.

A century later, during World War I, President Woodrow Wilson invoked it against nationals of the Central Powers: the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria.

According to the National Archives , U.S. authorities used the law to place over 6,000 “enemy aliens” — many of them Germans — in internment camps, with some remaining in detention up to two years after fighting had ended.

The U.S. Marshals Service says it registered 480,000 German “enemy aliens” and arrested 6,300 between the declaration of war in April 1917 and the armistice in November 1918.

Most recently, President Franklin Roosevelt invoked the act after the attack on Pearl Harbor, designating Japanese, German and Italian nationals as “alien enemies” during World War II.

Roosevelt's proclamation required residents from all three countries to register with the U.S. government and authorized the internment of any alien enemy “deemed potentially dangerous to the peace and security of the US.”

By the end of WWII, over 31,000 suspected enemy aliens and their families — including Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany — had been interned at camps and military facilities across the U.S., according to the National Archives . Several thousand of them were ultimately repatriated to their country of origin, either by choice or by force.

Sponsor Message

Vladeck says the Alien Enemies Act was used to detain mostly Italian and German nationals. The bulk of the more than 100,000 Japanese Americans who were placed in internment camps during the war were U.S. citizens, detained under different legal grounds.



How strong is Trump’s case?

The act hasn’t been invoked since WWII, which Vladeck says is largely because the nature of war has changed over the last eight decades.

The fine print of the act says the president can only take on this authority once Congress has declared war, and — while the U.S. has been involved in plenty of conflicts over the decades — it hasn’t done so formally since 1942 .

“It hasn't been a source of contemporary controversy because we haven't had a declared war,” he explains. “And no one has tried to argue that that invasion or predatory incursion language could be used in any context other than a conventional war.”

Until Trump, that is. The former president — who has a long history of using dehumanizing language against minority groups and political opponents — has repeatedly referred to the influx of migrants to the U.S. as an “ invasion ” and vowed mass deportations .

But he hasn’t blamed a specific country or conflict that would fall within the scope of the 1798 act, Vladeck says, which is one of the reasons he doesn’t think Trump’s argument will succeed.

Even some anti-immigration advocates in favor of deploying the act acknowledge those key legal challenges.

Defining illegal immigration as an invasion and migrant gangs as foreign nations would be an “uphill climb in federal court,” George Fishman , former deputy general counsel at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security under Trump, wrote last year.



What are some possible outcomes?

Trump doesn’t need the Alien Enemies Act to go after undocumented immigrants, Vladeck says, noting that presidents already have the authority to arrest, detain and remove them.

Sponsor Message

“The issue that has hamstrung each of the last four presidents, of both parties, has not been legal authority — it’s a lack of resources,” he says. “The federal government doesn’t have the capacity to identify, track down, round up and remove every single one of the 11 million-plus undocumented immigrants in this country.”

One of the primary obstacles is a lack of funding for immigration enforcement, something that lawmakers sought to address in a bipartisan border security bill earlier this year. It would have put $20 billion toward border provisions and implemented several policy changes to adjust and expedite the asylum process.

Senate Republicans blocked the bill after pressure from Trump, which Democratic critics say he did so that he could campaign in part on fixing the chaos at the border.

“The irony that Trump is now trotting out this old, anachronistic statute to solve a problem that he could have solved much more directly and much less controversially, I think it ought not to be lost on the folks who are learning about these authorities for the first time,” Vladeck says.

toggle caption Getty Images

If Trump were reelected and proceeded to invoke these powers — which he could do unilaterally, unless a majority of the House and Senate were to block him — Vladeck thinks he would be challenged in court immediately and have a tough time defending his case.

“The sort of the notion that the courts would look kindly upon using this kind of authority where, one, he doesn't need it, and two, it would really be a stretch in what is already a pretty controversial legal power, I think is pretty far-fetched,” he says.

Katherine Yon Ebright, counsel with the Brennan Center’s Liberty and National Security Program, says it’s unclear whether courts would intervene to stop the Alien Enemies Act from being used in peacetime.

Sponsor Message

“The last time the Alien Enemies Act was challenged, in Ludecke v. Watkins in 1948, the Supreme Court upheld President Harry S. Truman’s extended reliance on the law three years after the end of World War II,” she wrote in a legal analysis . “The Court reasoned that the question of when a war terminates and wartime authorities expire is too ‘political’ for judicial resolution.”

On the other hand, she says, a lot has changed since then, including contemporary understandings of equal protection and due process.

Courts and the public have rejected the 1944 Korematsu case that upheld Japanese internment. Congress provided reparations to surviving Japanese Americans and formally apologized for the use of the Alien Enemies Act during WWII. If a president invokes the act again, she says, courts might look at those legal challenges differently — “on the merits instead of categorically deferring to the president.”

But the surest way to prevent the act from being abused, Yon Ebright writes, would be for Congress to proactively repeal it.

Some Democratic lawmakers — Rep. Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Sen. Mazie Hirono of Hawaii — have tried in recent years by introducing the “ Neighbors Not Enemies ” Act, which would repeal the Alien Enemies Act, but hasn’t gained traction.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Donald Trump’s militaristic plan to deport as many as 20 million undocumented immigrants would tear apart families, likely cost hundreds of billions of dollars, harm the economy, and raise all sorts of constitutional, humanitarian and logistical problems.

But ask Republican lawmakers and candidates about the particulars of what could be a “bloody story,” as the GOP presidential nominee himself acknowledged last month, and they quickly shift the subject or downplay its implications, a sign of how eager they are to exploit their advantage on immigration issues against Democrats without actually owning up to the extremeness of what their party’s leader is proposing.

Advertisement

“That’s a very big logistical undertaking,” Nevada Republican Sam Brown said Thursday in a debate with Sen. Jacky Rosen (D) when asked if he supported the proposal.

“Where we need to start is securing the border,” Brown added, pointing to migrants with criminal records. “This is a huge undertaking, but it starts with securing that border.”

Rosen, meanwhile, followed up with some relevant questions.

“How would that happen? Who would get caught in that? How many innocent people would get rounded up?” she asked on Thursday, pushing for passage of the bipartisan border security bill that Republicans had blocked on orders from Trump earlier this year. Brown let her questions pass without a response.

Trump’s advisers have provided ample details about the plan, including the necessary construction of enormous prison camps for immigrant families, part of an effort to deport millions of people at a record pace. The camps would be built “on open land in Texas near the border” and would have the capacity to house as many as 70,000 people, which would double the country’s current immigrant detention capacity, Stephen Miller, the main point man on immigration in Trump’s White House, said last year. They’ve also suggested enlisting local police departments and the military to help carry out the deportations. The American Immigration Council estimates a mass deportation program would cost $1 trillion over a decade.

Advertisement

Former President Donald Trump stands with Sam Brown, a Republican candidate for Senate in Nevada, during a Sept. 13 campaign rally in Las Vegas. Brown ignored questions about Trump's mass deportation proposal at a campaign debate last month. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

His campaign has also invoked President Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose administration infamously oversaw a massive, deportation program, to describe “brand new crackdowns” on immigrants and “the largest deportation operation of illegal criminals, drug dealers and human traffickers in American history.”

At a campaign stop in Pennsylvania last week, Trump drew applause at a rally when he said he would “get these people out” and “deport them so rapidly.” He’s also used xenophobic and racist rhetoric against migrants, including saying that they are “poisoning the blood” of America as well as falsely claiming that they are genetically predisposed to commit crimes. (Studies have repeatedly shown immigrants commit crimes at lower rates than native-born Americans.)

Trump’s calls for mass deportations and camps, his promise to use military force against an “enemy from within,” his threats against the independent news media and his glorification of violence have evoked comparisons to authoritarian regimes, including by the former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, retired Army Gen. Mark Milley, who called Trump “fascist to the core.”

Among Republicans on Capitol Hill, however, the idea of rounding up 11 million undocumented immigrants in the biggest deportation operation in the country’s history is treated far less seriously. GOP senators said they either weren’t familiar with the plan or spun it in ways that sounded more politically palatable.

Advertisement

“I don’t know much about it,” Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky told HuffPost last month.

“Let’s start with the worst,” added Sen. Eric Schmitt of Missouri. “Let’s deport previously convicted child sex offenders who are here. Let’s take it in chunks.”

Asked how Trump’s plan would work, Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said: “You just start revoking people who are here temporarily, like TPS, [and] say they’ve gotta go.”

The U.S. currently grants legal residency through the Temporary Protected Status (TPS) program to people who came to the country to escape crisis conditions in Ukraine, Venezuela, Syria, Myanmar, Yemen, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Nepal, Nicaragua, Sudan and South Sudan. Trump has vowed to revoke TPS for the thousands of Haitian migrants in Springfield, Ohio, whom he has smeared, accusing them falsely of eating neighbors’ pets.

“I don’t know much about it.” - Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.)

Meanwhile, Sen. Bill Cassidy of Louisiana said Trump should emulate the elevated levels of deportations under the administration of President Barack Obama, who was criticized by immigrant rights groups for being the “deporter in chief.”

Advertisement

“You look at what the Obama administration did and see how it worked,” Cassidy said. “When you deported people, they sent the message, ‘Don’t spend your money getting up there because they’re going to be deported right back.’ I suspect that’s what’s really the gist of what Trump’s talking about.”

Needless to say, Trump’s plan is significantly more involved than Obama’s deportations, which mostly targeted people with criminal records. Trump has not suggested focusing only on those in the TPS program or on criminals, but has said every single undocumented immigrant in the United States should be deported. At the Republican National Convention in July, his team passed out signs declaring ’Mass deportation now” to delegates.

But Sen. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, a critic of Trump who slammed him for his anti-immigrant rhetoric earlier this year, sounded skeptical of his plan for mass deportations.

“What does it mean to round up mass numbers of people that are here in this country illegally? What does that mean? I don’t know, and I’m not sure that he knows, as well,” Murkowski told HuffPost.

Republicans have hammered Democrats for months over the issue of immigration, which ranks in polls only behind the economy as Americans’ top issue. Significantly more U.S. adults compared with a year ago would also like to see immigration to the U.S. decreased, according to Gallup. Other polls have shown majority support for mass deportation, but public opinion is nuanced: A University of Maryland poll conducted this month showed swing-state voters favored a pathway to citizenship once they were informed about the details of mass deportation.

Advertisement

Most Democrats have also shifted their rhetoric on the topic of immigration compared with prior years, pressing for more and tougher security measures at the border. Vice President Kamala Harris, for example, has touted her tough-on-crime credentials, shredded past progressive positions like decriminalizing border crossings and even featured Trump’s border wall in her presidential campaign ads, messaging that seemed unthinkable during her 2020 presidential run in the crowded Democratic primary race.

“As a border state prosecutor, she took on drug cartels and jailed gang members for smuggling weapons and drugs across the border. As vice president, she backed the toughest border control bill in decades,” said one Harris campaign ad in August.

Yet she has also attacked Trump over his deportation plan, asking attendees at a Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute event last month to imagine its consequences.

“How’s that going to happen, massive raids? Massive detention camps?” she said. “What are they talking about?”

Other Democrats have used starker language to warn about Trump’s intentions and their severe consequences for the country.

Advertisement

“You should know he’s deadly serious,” Sen. Brian Schatz (D-Hawaii) told HuffPost last month. “It would cause turmoil, not just for individual families and communities, but economically it would tear the country asunder and it would crash our economy.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

BILLINGS, Mont. (AP) — A former Park Service ranger said Friday that U.S. Senate hopeful Tim Sheehy of Montana has been lying about a bullet wound that the candidate said came from fighting in Afghanistan — going public with an accusation that has nagged the Republican’s campaign for months.

The claim from former ranger Kim Peach that Sheehy in fact shot himself on a family trip in Montana was immediately dismissed by Sheehy and his allies as a smear campaign engineered by Democrats in a race that’s expected to help decide control of the Senate.

Advertisement

But with the election less than three weeks away, it adds to the huge pressures that the political newcomer already faced as he challenges three-term Democratic incumbent Sen. Jon Tester.

Sheehy is a former U.S. Navy SEAL and his military record is a centerpiece of his bid for office. During stump speeches and in a book published by Sheehy last year, he recounts being wounded on multiple occasions during combat, including in the arm in 2012.

Sheehy was awarded a Purple Heart for wounds sustained in a separate combat incident and was also awarded a Bronze Star.

A Sheehy campaign spokesperson said Peach was a partisan Democrat pushing a “defamatory story.”

“Anyone trying to take away from the fact that Tim Sheehy signed up for war as a young man and spent most of his 20s in some of the most dangerous places in the world is either a partisan hack, a journalist with an agenda, or outright a disgusting person,” spokesperson Katie Martin said.

Advertisement

He’s faced scrutiny over the arm wound since April, when The Washington Post quoted a Glacier National Park ranger anonymously saying Sheehy accidentally shot himself in 2015, when he was travelling with his family and his gun fell out of a vehicle and fired when it hit the ground in a parking lot on Logan Pass. The ranger who was quoted in the story was Peach.

Sheehy was ticketed and paid a $525 fine for illegally discharging a firearm in Glacier, government records show.

The Republican candidate said in response to the April story that he lied to the park ranger — not about being wounded in Afghanistan.

BOZEMAN, MONTANA - AUGUST 09: Montana Republican U.S. Senate candidate Tim Sheehy speaks during a rally for Republican presidential nominee, former U.S. President Donald Trump at the Brick Breeden Fieldhouse at Montana State University on August 9, 2024 in Bozeman, Montana. (Photo by Michael Ciaglo/Getty Images) Michael Ciaglo via Getty Images

Sheehy said he fell while hiking at Glacier and injured his arm, then concocted the story about the bullet wound to cover up the fact that the 2012 incident may have been friendly fire. He said he didn’t want members of his SEAL unit in Afghanistan to suffer any consequences.

Advertisement

With absentee voting in Montana underway and Sheehy poised for potential victory, Peach, a Democrat, said Friday that he “couldn’t let him get way with something like that without the truth being told.”

Peach said he interviewed Sheehy at the hospital where he was treated for the bullet wound and briefly confiscated the gun. Before returning it, Peach said he unloaded the weapon and found five live rounds and one that had been fired.

“At the time, he was obviously embarrassed about it. And you know, he admitted to what I was there for — the gun going off in the park,” Peach told The Associated Press. “He knows the truth and the truth isn’t complicated. It’s when you start lying things get complicated.”

His decision to go public was reported earlier by the Post.

Attorneys for Sheehy’s campaign said Peach’s recent statements differ from the facts in a declaration submitted by the ranger after interviewing Sheehy in 2015.

The declaration made no mention of Peach examining the gun and finding only five live rounds, the attorneys wrote in a letter provided by the campaign. There was no gunshot residue on Sheehy when he went to the hospital, nor any gunshots reported in Glacier that day, the attorneys said.

Advertisement

“There is no physical evidence suggesting that Mr. Sheehy discharged his firearm at Glacier National Park. Because it didn’t happen,” attorneys Daniel Watkins and Dustin Pusch wrote.

Peach worked as a park ranger for more than three decades and is now retired. He lives in small town near Glacier. He’s posted a photo of himself on social media wearing a “Make America Wrong Again” hat and said he votes for Democrats.

He denied any connection with the Tester campaign or other Democratic organizations.

A recent Tester campaign ad criticizes Sheehy for lying about the gunshot wound. A campaign spokesperson did not have an immediate comment Friday.

The Montana Democratic Party seized on Peach’s latest comments as providing a “firsthand account” of what happened to Sheehy.

But Mike Berg, communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, rejected the latest reiteration of the accusations against Sheehy. He suggested it’s a sign of Democrats’ desperation because they fear Tester will lose.

Advertisement
Tim Sheehy, an ex-Navy SEAL and pro-Donald Trump conservative, is running against incumbent Democratic Montana Sen. Jon Tester. It is among the most contested races of the 2024 election. Tim Sheehy for Montana

Montana GOP Senate hopeful Tim Sheehy, who made his fortune as the founder and CEO of an aerial firefighting company that has relied largely on lucrative federal contracts, has repeatedly accused wildland firefighters of dragging their feet to put out blazes and “milking” disasters for overtime pay, a HuffPost review of his recent statements found.

In his 2023 book “Mudslingers: A True Story of Aerial Firefighting,” Sheehy described a discussion he had with fellow firefighters during a series of blazes in Idaho in 2015.

Advertisement

“I was hanging out at the base, shooting the breeze with some other guys, talking about how intense the fires seemed to be, just trying to make conversation and contribute to the cause,” Sheehy wrote. “‘Hopefully we can hammer this thing down quickly and get it under control,’ I said. Most of the other guys nodded solemnly, but one person, a pilot, kind of straightened up and grunted. ‘Well, we don’t want it to go too fast,’ he said. ‘There’s a lot of overtime pay to be earned out there! We put it out, it’s back on salary!’”

That conversation led Sheehy — an ex-Navy SEAL who founded a Bozeman, Montana-based firefighting company called Bridger Aerospace in 2014 — to confront what he described as a “troubling undercurrent of complacency, of embracing or at least accepting the status quo because, frankly, there was so much money at stake.”

“I’ve since come to realize that this is not a feeling shared universally, but it does exist, and to deny its existence is to impede the efforts of those who understand the importance of change,” he wrote.

At the time of that 2015 encounter, Sheehy was still working to get Bridger Aerospace, a startup with a focus on using infrared cameras and other surveillance technology to monitor fires, off the ground.

Advertisement

While Sheehy would go on to make millions from the same pot of federal money that wildland firefighters rely on, his writings and more recent public comments suggest he came to view many in the field as bad actors competing for and ultimately wasting the government’s limited resources.

The 2015 conversation “smacked less of concern or common sense than it did laziness — or, worse, greed,” he wrote in his book. “I wouldn’t call it malevolence; anyone who climbs into a plane or picks up a shovel to fight wildfires clearly has a capacity for goodness and a desire to help. That said, even in positions that are demonstrably service-oriented, there is the potential for self-interest, if not outright corruption, leading to a response that is not necessarily in the public’s best interest.”

″If there is no fire, there is no money,” he added. “And the faster that a fire is extinguished, the sooner the money dries up or goes elsewhere. It might seem ridiculous to worry about a shortage of work to keep the wildfire industry busy given the extraordinary expansion of the season in recent years, not to mention the gnawing sense that firefighters will forever be overmatched against nature. But old beliefs and protocols die hard, and clearly there were some in the industry who saw nothing wrong with milking every fire for what it was worth despite the risks and the blurring of ethical boundaries.”

Sheehy echoed that same sentiment during a book signing in Huntsville, Alabama in March, months after he launched his bid against three-term incumbent Democratic Sen. Jon Tester. He told the crowd that his company’s use of technology to fight fires more quickly and effectively was “not received well” within the broader industry.

“There’s a very real dynamic in wildfire that a lot of those people don’t want to put the fire out,” he said at the event, according to a recording obtained by HuffPost. “It’s called ‘let it burn.’ And they don’t want to put the fire out because that’s where they get their overtime, that’s where they get their hazard pay. And for a lot of these folks out there — I don’t mean to cast them in a negative light, but it’s just a fact — they don’t want that fire to be put out, because ... they make half their annual income on hazard overtime pay during the summer fires.”

Advertisement

Sheehy speaks at a rally supporting Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump in Bozeman, Montana, on August 9, 2024. NATALIE BEHRING via Getty Images

Since the early 1970s, the U.S. Forest Service has increasingly allowed certain wildfires, usually those that start naturally in remote areas, to continue burning — not so that firefighters could rake in overtime pay, but in hopes of slowly reversing the devastating impacts of decades of aggressive fire suppression, which has left many forests overloaded with fuel and more prone to extreme infernos.

Scientists have come to understand the critical role fire plays in many forest ecosystems, from clearing away dead vegetation to controlling invasive species. But the Forest Service disputes that it has ever had a “let it burn” policy. And the vast majority of fires — roughly 98% — are still suppressed before they consume 100 acres.

In his book, Sheehy does dive into the complex set of factors driving increasingly catastrophic wildfires, including climate change and the nation’s long history of racing to extinguish every fire as quickly as possible. He describes fire suppression as a “double-edged sword” and notes that “putting every single fire out immediately all the time isn’t the answer.” And he sympathizes with wildland fire crews, describing them as “highly motivated and skilled individuals who make little more than minimum wage and usually have a passion for both the work and the lifestyle.”

But aside from that single comment from an unnamed wildland firefighting pilot in 2015, he offers nothing to back up his claim that a significant number of firefighters are standing around watching fires burn for personal financial gain.

Advertisement

Sheehy’s campaign did not respond to any of HuffPost’s questions about his portrayal of wildland firefighters. Instead, in a short email statement, campaign spokesperson Katie Martin touted Sheehy’s military and business credentials and condemned HuffPost’s reporting on the GOP candidate as “embarrassing.”

Ben McLane is a captain of a Forest Service fire crew and a board member of Grassroots Wildland Firefighters, a nonprofit that advocates for federal firefighters. He told HuffPost he “respects the heck out of” aerial firefighters and applauded Sheehy for starting a company that provides an essential service to communities threatened by fire, but condemned Sheehy’s statements about wildland firefighters as “fundamentally flawed.”

“I’ve never seen firefighters let something burn for the sake of keeping the good times going and for monetary reasons,” McLane told HuffPost. “You’ve got to take into account all you’re sacrificing to be out there.”

“For him to basically accuse firefighters of retreating intentionally — these same people who represent the kind of patriotic attributes in action that he claims to represent in words — is a contradiction that is just hard for me to fathom,” he added.

Sheehy resigned as CEO of Bridger Aerospace in July to focus on his Senate bid. Polls show Sheehy leading Tester in the race, which many say could ultimately decide which party controls the Senate next year.

Advertisement

As HuffPost previously reported, Sheehy was once outspoken about the need to combat global climate change and supported major climate initiatives. But since launching his campaign, Sheehy has repeatedly railed against what he calls the “climate cult” and the “disastrous socialist Green New Deal.”

Meanwhile, in public documents, Bridger Aerospace has made clear-eyed assessments of the effects of worsening climate change. In its most recent annual report to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Bridger wrote that the “consequences of these climate-driven events may vary widely and could include increased stress on our services due to new patterns of demand, physical damage to our fleet and infrastructure, higher operational costs and an increase in the number [of] requests for our services.”

Fossil fuel-driven climate change, misguided fire suppression policies and increased development in forested areas have triggered an an era of megafires that pose a growing threat to many communities. Yet the wildland firefighters on the front lines of this emergency remain woefully underpaid, earning a base salary of just $15 per hour while facing extreme physical and mental health risks, as ProPublica recently reported. The surge in overtime pay among wildland firefighters is largely due to a shortage of people willing to do this dangerous job, and for many firefighters, overtime pay is the only way to make a living wage.

“A lot of the work of Grassroots has been advocating for a livable wage for firefighters, which we still have not attained,” McLane said. “I don’t think it’s greedy to identify pathways to balance your call to service and adventure with the need to feed your family and wanting to be out on assignment to do that.”

He noted that a bill to hike wildland firefighters’ wages has stalled in Congress. If lawmakers decide to move the bill, “that will be a great day, because no longer will we have to face that moral conflict,” he said.

Advertisement

One of Bridger Aerospace's aircraft, known as a "super scooper," battles the Hermits Peak and Calf Canyon Fires in the Santa Fe National Forest in New Mexico in April 2022. via Associated Press

Sheehy is not the first Montana Republican to accuse wildland firefighters of being lazy and mismanaging infernos.

In July 2006, then-GOP Sen. Conrad Burns famously accosted a crew of highly trained wildland firefighters, known as hotshots, that were in the state to help battle a large fire near the town of Worden. At the Billings, Montana airport, Burns accused the crew of doing a ”piss-poor job” fighting the blaze.

According to a state official’s report of the incident, Burns pointed at one particular firefighter and said, “See that guy over there? He hasn’t done a God-damned thing. … You probably paid that guy $10,000 to sit around. It’s gotta change.”

The state official noted in her report that she “offered to the senator that our firefighters make around $8-$12 per hour and time-and-a-half for overtime. He seemed a little surprised that it wasn’t higher.″

Advertisement

Burns later apologized for his outburst, saying he should have “chosen my words more carefully” and that his criticism “should not have been directed at those who were working hard to put [the fire] out.” A few months later, Tester narrowly defeated Burns, a three-term incumbent.

On the 2-year anniversary of Burns’ attack on wildland firefighters, Wildfire Today, a publication of Missoula, Montana-based nonprofit International Association of Wildland Fire, summarized the incident like this:
Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country.

Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change.

We rely on readers like you — join us.
Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar is dead. Can Israel seal a hostage deal now?

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.



Today's top stories

Yahya Sinwar, the leader of Hamas and Israel’s most wanted man in Gaza, is dead, the Israeli military confirmed. He was considered the mastermind behind the Oct. 7, 2023 attack on Israel that killed 1,200 people, according to the Israeli government. The attack sparked a war that has killed over 42,000 Palestinians in Gaza, according to Gaza health officials. The Israeli military reported that he was killed in Rafah, in the south.

toggle caption Adel Hana/AP

🎧 Sinwar's death — the latest high-profile killing of a Hamas leader after two other key leaders were killed over the summer — has raised questions about who will assume leadership of the group , NPR’s Hadeel Al-Schalchi tells Up First. Sinwar’s right-hand man has been his brother, Mohamed Sinwar, but there are others outside of Gaza who have represented Hamas in Qatar and Turkey for years. Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said last night his ultimate obligation is to secure the release of the remaining hostages. The U.S. and Israel have long argued that Sinwar was the main obstacle to reaching a hostage deal, according to former Israeli intelligence officer Michael Milshtein. President Biden has emphasized the need to move forward, indicating it’s time to reinvigorate stalled cease-fire talks.

, NPR’s Hadeel Al-Schalchi tells Up First. Sinwar’s right-hand man has been his brother, Mohamed Sinwar, but there are others outside of Gaza who have represented Hamas in Qatar and Turkey for years. Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said last night his ultimate obligation is to secure the release of the remaining hostages. The U.S. and Israel have long argued that Sinwar was the main obstacle to reaching a hostage deal, according to former Israeli intelligence officer Michael Milshtein. President Biden has emphasized the need to move forward, indicating it’s time to reinvigorate stalled cease-fire talks. ➡️ Who was Yahya Sinwar? Here's everything you need to know about the obsessively secretive man labeled a psychopath by Israeli politicians and security officials.

Sponsor Message

NPR put together a pair of focus groups in May with “double haters,” voters who disapproved of both former President Donald Trump and Biden. This was to help understand how they made up their minds about the candidates, but a lot has changed since then. This week, NPR went back to those very same voters to find out which way they are now leaning in the tighter-than-ever race between Vice President Kamala Harris and Trump.



🎧 NPR’s Mara Liasson says that of 10 springtime double haters, four were locked in or leaning towards Trump, five were locked in and leaning towards Harris, and one was certain he would not vote for either. The shift towards Harris seems to be driven more by anti-Trump than pro-Harris sentiment. "She still isn't garnering as much support as Biden did in 2020 at the same point in the race with key Democratic groups like African Americans, Hispanics, and young people," Liasson said. These voters seem less concerned about a Harris outcome as they didn't believe she would undermine the election. More apprehension surrounds Trump and the potential for political violence due to his repeated refusal to commit to accepting the results of any election he didn't win.

Sponsor Message

Biden is in Berlin, Germany, today to meet with European leaders for the last time during his presidency. It’s a farewell trip to a region that has been front and center since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The meeting holds great political importance, especially as the U.S. is poised to elect a new president while the outcome of the war in Ukraine remains uncertain. Here’s a look into this meeting's significance.



🎧 “America’s relationship with Europe is stronger than ever, and that’s largely due to the work that President Biden has done these past four years,” NPR’s Rob Schmitz says. According to a recent survey by the German think tank Körber-Stiftung, 80% of Germans polled believe that another Trump presidency would harm trans-Atlantic relations. Trump's uncertainty about continuing support for Ukraine could force Europe to step in to fill the gap in U.S. support for the country if he is re-elected. This could put pressure on Germany in particular to strengthen its own security. Furthermore, a Trump presidency could contribute to the growing popularity of far-right parties in Germany and across Europe.

Picture show

toggle caption Claire Harbage/NPR

NPR’s Claire Harbage and Fatma Tanis spent a week in September speaking with more than two dozen women in several refugee camps in Chad, which is now home to over 600,000 people who have fled Sudan. The women said that the adult men in their families — their husbands, fathers, adult sons, and brothers — were almost always missing. Some men had disappeared, been killed by the Rapid Support Forces to prevent them from defending themselves and their families, or had been conscripted by the Sudanese army. The conflict has displaced over 13 million people and resulted in what the United Nations is calling the world’s largest humanitarian crisis.



📷 See some of the women impacted and learn how they’re mourning the loss.

Sponsor Message

Weekend picks

toggle caption A24

Check out what NPR is watching, reading and listening to this weekend:

🍿Movies: We Live In Time stars Florence Pugh and Andrew Garfield, who laugh and cry as a couple trying to make the most of their time together. The story jumps from their first meeting to their later crisis and several critical points in between.

📺 TV: Disclaimer stars Cate Blanchett as a successful documentarian who is confronted with a secret from her past. Each of the seven episodes propels the story forward, providing new clues, raising bigger questions, and leaving the audience eager to learn more.

📚 Books: Clean is narrated by Estela, a sharp woman who works as a housemaid for a wealthy family. She becomes the main suspect in the death of a 7-year-old who was found dead in the pool of the home where she works.

🎵 Music: Renowned guitarist and composer John Scofield will be celebrating 50 years of recorded music in November. To commemorate this milestone, Jazz Night in America presented him with a special challenge: Choose 10 pivotal tracks from his vast discography and reveal the stories behind them. Listen to the full setlist here.

🎮 Games: Super Mario Party Jamboree is packed with variety, including 112 mini-games, 22 playable characters, seven boards, five multiplayer modes and an exclusively single-player adventure.

❓Quiz: If you've paid attention to the presidential hopefuls and incoming pandas, you can pass at least half of this week's quiz. But if you are like me, you will ace it all. Are you ready to take it on?

3 things to know before you go

toggle caption Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP

Drug overdose deaths are down 12.7%, as per CDC data released this week. If the trend continues, this year could be the first since 2020 to see overdose deaths drop below 100,000. Vikash Yadav, a former Indian intelligence official, is facing U.S. federal charges for allegedly planning to assassinate an American citizen in New York City. The intended victim is a leader in the movement for an independent Sikh homeland. Recently released body camera footage shows Tyron McAlpin, a deaf Black man with cerebral palsy, allegedly being beaten and tased by Phoenix police officers in August 2024. This comes after a DOJ report found evidence of discrimination by Phoenix police against Black, Hispanic, and Native American individuals.

Sponsor Message

This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.
The Today, Explained podcast is taking a deep dive into the major themes of the 2024 election through the lens of seven battleground states. We’ve heard so far from voters in Georgia, Pennsylvania, and Arizona, and this week we turn to Wisconsin, where rural voters could make the difference.

With less than a month until Election Day, Wisconsin Democrats are pouring time and energy into parts of the state they routinely lose by double digits in the hope of reaching the rural voters who went solidly for Donald Trump in the last two presidential elections. All signs indicate that these voters will do so again, but that hasn’t stopped Democrats from campaigning fiercely in rural districts to claw back as many voters as they can.

According to Rob Mentzer, the rural communities reporter for Wisconsin Public Radio, Democrats are clear-eyed about the fact that they almost certainly won’t win in rural parts of Wisconsin. By narrowing the margins, though, they hope to “lose by less” — and thus win statewide.

If that tactic succeeds, it would be a big deal. Though Wisconsin was long a progressive stronghold, a wave of Republican support in the early 2000s transformed it from part of Democrats’ Midwestern “blue wall” into a battleground state often decided by razor-thin margins.

In 2020, Biden won the state by just over half a percentage point, thanks in large part to high turnout in Madison, Milwaukee, and other cities. If Harris and incumbent Democratic Sen. Tammy Baldwin, who is up for reelection, can make gains with rural voters this time, it would expand their path to victory in the state.

Today, Explained host Sean Rameswaram spoke with Mentzer about what he’s hearing from rural voters in north-central Wisconsin as Democrats make a play for their support.

Below is an excerpt of their conversation, edited for length and clarity. There’s much more in the full podcast, so listen to Today, Explained wherever you get your podcasts, including Apple Podcasts and Spotify.

Sean Rameswaram

Can we just talk really quickly about what Wisconsin looked like, I don’t know, before Donald Trump? It used to be a progressive place, right?

Rob Mentzer

Wisconsin has a very long history of progressive politics. From the turn of the 20th century, it was actually one of the birthplaces of the progressive movement. Robert La Follette was a populist governor, later US senator. He was beloved by the state’s farmers, by rural areas. And you can draw a straight line from that progressive movement in Wisconsin to a lot of the New Deal legislation and into modern progressivism, for sure.

Sean Rameswaram

And what changed? Is it as simple as Donald Trump or is there more to that story?

Rob Mentzer

I think that it goes back a little bit further than that. So in 2010, there was a massive wave election for Republicans. And one of the Republicans elected that year was Scott Walker, who became Wisconsin’s governor. Some people will recall the first thing he did in office was to introduce a bill that essentially removed collective bargaining rights from most public unions — teachers, government workers. And there was a huge backlash to this. There were weeks of protests in the state capital. But Republicans won that battle. And then, because 2010 was a redistricting year, they used their trifecta power to entrench those majorities in the legislature. Walker survived a recall election in 2012. He won reelection in 2014. And that gets us to the Trump era in 2016.

Hillary Clinton famously did not visit Wisconsin during the 2016 campaign. And she did not win Wisconsin on election night in 2016.

Now, the reasons for that are complicated. But I think that manufacturing really is a big part of it. It’s one of the absolute pillars of Wisconsin’s economy. There are a lot of rural communities where a paper mill or a window and door manufacturer, a Harley Davidson plant, are the biggest employers. They provide the most jobs. And there was a real and a long-term decline in that share of manufacturing jobs in Wisconsin that you can trace as far back as the 1970s all the way into the 2010s.

Some people absolutely blamed NAFTA for that or other free-trade agreements. Those were things that President Bill Clinton had signed into law, was an advocate for, and Hillary Clinton was associated with, while Trump was vocally against.

Also, in the 2010s, we saw a lot of consolidation of dairy farms, a lot of closures of smaller farms. And I think that those things were part of the change in rural areas that voters reacted to.

Sean Rameswaram

Is that how Biden flips it back in 2020? Because he’s got that Obama affiliation and he doesn’t have that NAFTA affiliation?

Rob Mentzer

In a word, no.

Sean Rameswaram

Okay!

Rob Mentzer

The election in 2020 looked a lot like the election in 2016 in Wisconsin. The rural vote came out for Trump in huge numbers. Bigger than 2016. The only thing is that the vote in Madison and in other Democratic strongholds was a little bigger. Democrats gained ground in the suburbs in Wisconsin in 2020, and it put Biden over the top by about 20,000 votes in Wisconsin, which was enough, but which was less than 1 percent. But the sort of rural base of Trump voters, they absolutely turned out.

Sean Rameswaram

Okay. So let’s talk about where that leaves us this year, in 2024, in just a few weeks now. It sounded like you were saying you’d expect Wisconsin to go for Trump again from your vista, is that right?

Rob Mentzer

Well, I’d certainly expect that the part of the state that I live in to go for Trump again. There’s no question about that, I don’t think. It is worth saying that Democrats this year have put a lot of money and resources and volunteer time into rural Wisconsin.

Sean Rameswaram

And what are Democrats doing to sort of shift the narrative in rural communities in Wisconsin, Rob? What are they doing to mobilize Democrats and to make new Democrats in these communities where you’ve been hanging out?

Rob Mentzer

Democrats have opened something like 50 field offices around the state, including more than 30 in counties that Trump won in 2020. They are out knocking on doors and doing direct mail and all the other sort of campaign outreach tactics, including a lot more in-person work than was the case four years ago.

We’ve also seen how Kamala Harris is trying to reach out to Republican voters directly. This month, she campaigned with Liz Cheney, a former member of House Republican leadership. They did that event in Ripon, Wisconsin, which is where the Republican Party was born in the 19th century. And it was explicitly understood as a way to reach out to voters who consider themselves Republican but may be open to voting for Harris.

And then there’s Harris’s vice presidential choice. Tim Walz talks about having rural roots, growing up on a farm in Nebraska. And he just sort of comes off as a rural guy. I passed on a highway in central Wisconsin one of those giant yard signs that said “Harris 2024,” and someone had spray-painted “Tim Walz for VP” underneath it, I guess as a way to emphasize he’s also part of the ticket. And I do hear from people in rural areas in Wisconsin who feel like they connect with Tim Walz, a hunter. He wears a camo cap and [he’s a] small-town football coach.

And then one other factor this year is that for the first time in more than a decade, Wisconsin has new voting maps that actually do give Democrats a chance of taking back a majority in at least one house of the state legislature. I think that for sure has brought some new attention and additional energy to Democratic organizing on the local level.

Sean Rameswaram

So do you think it could work? Do you think Democrats could win back rural voters in Wisconsin?

Rob Mentzer

Well, they could win back some of the rural voters, maybe. The Democrats I talked to, their goal is to lose by less in these rural areas. So one of those, Jim Davis, said that they’re not even remotely thinking that they’re going to get over 50 percent in Taylor County. And so if they can get to 35 percent in areas where maybe they’re lucky to scrape 25 percent, that can really make a difference in a state as close as Wisconsin.
It was just a couple of months ago when Donald Trump launched a bizarre offensive against Brian Kemp, Georgia’s incumbent Republican governor, for no particular reason. The former president slammed Kemp as a “bad guy,” “disloyal” and “Little Brian.”

At an event in the Peachtree State, Trump also targeted the governor’s wife and goaded his followers into booing their home state’s GOP governor. Perhaps most importantly, the former president singled out Kemp for failing to commit election fraud to benefit him in 2020.

Two months later, Kemp explained why he’s supporting his party’s presidential nominee anyway. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported:

‘Look, you may not like Donald Trump personally, but you’ll like his policies a lot better than Kamala Harris’,’ Kemp said at a recent Republican gathering. ‘It’s a business decision. You’re making a business decision.’

This is a common refrain. The New Yorker’s Susan Glasser has a new report on wealthy Republicans who’ve re-embraced Trump, highlighting billionaire investor Nelson Peltz who denounced Trump the day after the Jan. 6 attack. In an interview with CNBC, Peltz apologized for his vote and said that Trump would always be remembered for that day’s “disgrace.”

“As an American,” he added at the time, “I’m embarrassed.”

Now, Peltz and many of his allies are nevertheless backing Trump again — because like Kemp, they’re “making a business decision.”

Similarly, The New York Times’ Nate Cohn published a report this week on why the former president is faring better in 2024 polling among Black and Hispanic voters, despite his overt racism. “Many people assume that Democrats win Black and Hispanic voters simply because of the party’s commitment to advancing racial equality,” Cohn wrote, “but the role of economic self-interest should not be underestimated.”

A whole lot of folks, in other words, are simply “making a business decision.”

But what if they’re asking the right question, while coming to the wrong answer? Rachel had a great A block on the subject this week, and it’s worth reviewing the basic truths:

Inflation is where it was when Trump left office. Economic growth under the first three years of the Biden-Harris administration we now know is higher than economic growth was under the first three years of the Trump administration. ... Economic growth is up. Wages are up. Retail sales are good. Interest rates are dropping. We are having record highs on Wall Street. Biden and Harris, this administration has produced the best job growth numbers of any presidential administration in American history by a mile. Unemployment numbers are profoundly low and in a sustained way. It’s the best unemployment figures that we have seen in decades.

In fact, it was just a couple of weeks ago when The New York Times reported that the U.S. job market “is as healthy as it has ever been” — as in, in the history of the United States — and described recent economic growth as “robust.”

A few days later, The Washington Post’s Heather Long explained in a column that by “just about every measure, the U.S. economy is in good shape. Growth is strong. Unemployment is low. Inflation is back down. More important, many Americans are getting sizable pay raises, and middle-class wealth has surged to record levels. We are living through one of the best economic years of many people’s lifetimes.”

The same day, Politico described the status quo as “a dream economy.” Soon after, The Economist described the U.S. economy as “the envy of the world,” adding that the American economy “has left other rich countries in the dust.”

And so maybe you’re willing to overlook the fact that Trump deployed a violent mob to attack his own country’s Capitol because he didn’t like the election results. And you’re willing to look past the fact that he’s currently awaiting sentencing after having been found guilty of 34 felonies. And maybe it doesn’t matter to you that Trump is also awaiting trial on dozens of additional felony charges (he’s pleaded not guilty).

And maybe you don’t care about the time he told Americans that disinfectant injections could treat Covid, about his family separation policy, about his corrupt pardons, his impeachment scandals, his racism or his authoritarian agenda.

Maybe you’re simply “making a business decision.”

But in practice, what does that mean? Under the Biden-Harris administration, the U.S. economy hasn’t just “left other rich countries in the dust,” it’s also left the Trump administration’s record in the dust.

If your concern is about the deficit and fiscal issues, Trump’s record is indefensible, and his vision for the near-future is even worse.

If your concern is about inflation, Trump’s economic agenda is rooted in policies that would absolutely make inflation worse — as economists keep trying to tell the people.

If your concern is about the candidates’ business backgrounds, Trump failed repeatedly in the private sector, and he’s been reduced to hawking a bunch of highly sketchy products.

If your concern is about how the candidates interact with business leaders, Trump keeps having special gatherings with corporate executives, who tend to come away with the impression that the Republican is utterly clueless.

If your concern is about the candidates’ running mates, Republican Sen. JD Vance has spoken publicly about imposing “pain” on businesses that fail to align with his party’s culture war agenda.

If your concern is about the candidates looking out for the business community, Trump has recently threatened a variety of corporate giants, from John Deere to Google.

For those are who are simply “making a business decision,” this doesn’t seem like an especially tough call.
Welcome back, Deadline: Legal Newsletter readers. The Supreme Court just wrapped its October argument session. The week featured a Joe Biden win on pollution rules, a loss for Donald Trump foe Michael Avenatti, a prayer from Trump foe Michael Cohen, and a plea from Justice Sonia Sotomayor in yet another capital case with a possibly innocent man.

Trump retaliation is the topic of Cohen’s pending bid. The ex-president’s ex-fixer wants to sue Trump and other officials for locking him up in 2020 after he refused to give up his right to speak out against the then-president. The justices considered Cohen’s long-shot petition in their private conference Friday, and we could soon learn whether the court will hear the appeal as Trump runs for office again while vowing revenge.

Cohen hopes for a better outcome than Avenatti, whose petition the justices rejected Tuesday in their routine order list. Stormy Daniels’ ex-lawyer sought a review of his convictions for cheating the porn star of money from a deal on her book that detailed the sex she said she had with Trump, which the Republican presidential nominee has denied. Like Cohen, Daniels testified for the state at Trump’s New York fraud trial that found Trump guilty of covering up hush money paid to Daniels ahead of the 2016 election.

As it happens, Daniels was back in the news this week in an exclusive MSNBC report about Trump’s attempt to silence her again ahead of Election Day — though not criminally this time, it seems. Trump is set to be sentenced in his New York case Nov. 26, assuming Judge Juan Merchan declines to overturn the guilty verdicts based on the Supreme Court’s immunity ruling and the matter isn’t otherwise further delayed — which is always possible.

The Biden win came Wednesday, when the court let the administration enforce power plant emission limits, rejecting an emergency challenge from industry groups and GOP-led states while litigation continues. So what explains this Democratic victory, even if it’s only temporary? This might help: Justice Clarence Thomas dissented (without explaining why), Justice Samuel Alito recused himself (also without explaining why, though possibly because of his stock holding), and Justice Brett Kavanaugh issued a statement, joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch, that said he thought the challengers could succeed later in the litigation but that it was premature to side with them now.

The capital case of Robert Roberson, who was convicted in his daughter’s 2002 death based on the since-disputed “shaken baby syndrome,” was a litigation whirlwind Thursday that ended (for now) with his execution being blocked in Texas state court. But that was only after a highly unusual move from a bipartisan group of state lawmakers to subpoena the prisoner to testify at a hearing next week — which, the Texas Supreme Court observed, Roberson can’t do if he’s dead.

The U.S. Supreme Court was no help to Roberson earlier that day, with Justice Sonia Sotomayor penning a statement explaining why the court couldn’t grant him relief. But the justice still suggested the state grant him a reprieve to reconsider his case. “That could prevent a miscarriage of justice from occurring: executing a man who has raised credible evidence of actual innocence,” Sotomayor wrote.

Meanwhile, Kavanaugh made a cameo in Georgia state court. A judge cited the Trump appointee’s warning of election chaos in a 2022 case to block a Trump-backed move to have 2024 ballots hand-counted. It was one of multiple MAGA voting measures rejected in the Georgia courts this week, but Republican appeals could end the story differently.

The story of Trump’s criminal cases is also still being written. Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis is trying to revive some dismissed counts on appeal while the defense presses its appeal to try to kick Willis and her office off the Georgia state election interference case. There’s no pending trial date in that one or any of Trump’s other criminal cases.

In the federal election interference case, U.S. District Judge Tanya Chutkan rejected Trump’s latest quest to keep yet more damaging information about him secret, though the latest materials put on the docket Friday were largely sealed or redacted, anyway.

And let’s not forget about the classified documents case, which is on appeal and saw a tangential development this week. When the case of Ryan Routh, who is accused of attempting to assassinate Trump, was assigned to U.S. District Judge Aileen Cannon, I mused whether Routh would seek Cannon’s recusal. He did so this week, noting the Trump appointee’s Trump-friendly dismissal of the documents case, Trump’s praise of Cannon, and the fact that, if Trump takes office again, he could nominate her to “a higher court were a vacancy to arise.”

The justices return to the bench for the November hearing session starting Nov. 4. That is, the day before Election Day. They aren’t set to hear any blockbuster cases then, but that could change if emergency election disputes emerge. In any event, the court just announced its December hearing calendar, featuring a Dec. 4 argument over the constitutionality of banning gender-affirming care for minors. So, no matter what happens in November, the justices have crucial decisions ahead.

Have any questions or comments for me? I’d love to hear from you! Please email deadlinelegal@nbcuni.com for a chance to be featured in a future newsletter.
Vice President Kamala Harris was asked directly about trans people on Wednesday for the first time this campaign season when Fox News’ Bret Baier questioned her about a 2019 statement in which she said she supported using taxpayer dollars for gender-affirming care for people who are incarcerated.

“I will follow the law, and it’s a law that Donald Trump actually followed,” she said. “These surgeries are available to, on a medical necessity basis, people in the federal prison system.” In mentioning Trump, she was referring to a New York Times article on Wednesday that said former President Donald Trump’s administration had provided gender-affirming care to incarcerated people. Trump has been running fearmongering ads attacking Harris for supporting such a policy.

She was referring to a New York Times article that said Trump’s administration’s provided gender-affirming care to incarcerated people.

When Baier again pressed her on the issue, Harris went back to Trump, whom she said “spent $20 million on those ads, trying to create a sense of fear in the voters because he actually has no plan in this election that is about focusing on the needs of the American people.” She continued: “Twenty million dollars on that ad, on an issue that, as it relates to the biggest issues that affect the American people, is really quite remote.”

It may end up being the last one of Harris’ rare mentions of trans people this campaign. At this year’s Democratic National Convention, only two speakers even used the word “trans,” and Democrats in general have been reluctant to defend trans people and their rights as Republicans have been spending millions of dollars on ads whipping up anti-trans resentment.

In two close U.S. Senate races, Democrats Sherrod Brown, who’s running for re-election in Ohio, and Rep. Colin Allred, who’s looking to unseat incumbent Ted Cruz in Texas, have not inspired trans folks that they’ll have our back.

Allred, who’s been attacked by Cruz for voting against a 2023 Republican bill requiring that sports participation be based on birth sex, responded with a short ad that begins: “Ted Cruz is lying again. But now he’s lying about our children. I’m a dad. I’m also a Christian. My faith has taught me that all kids are God’s kids. So let me be clear: I don’t want boys playing girls sports, or any of this ridiculous stuff that Ted Cruz is saying. Ted Cruz is lying about my record because he can’t defend his own.”

With the words “I don’t want boys playing girls’ sports,” is Allred agreeing with Cruz that transgender girls are boys? Or is the former NFL linebacker trying to play it both ways with phrasing that lets him plausibly deny that he opposed the participation of trans girls? However he meant it, it’s being interpreted by trans people (and probably by anti-trans people, too) as him opposing the participation of trans girls in sports.

I’m a dad. I’m also a Christian. My faith has taught me that all kids are God’s kids. So let me be clear: I don’t want boys playing girls sports, or any of this ridiculous stuff that Ted Cruz is saying. REP. COLIN ALLRED IN A CAMPAIGN AD

In Ohio, an ad from the Senate Leadership Fund, Senate Republicans' political action committee, says, “Brown backed Biden, voting to let biological transgender men participate in women’s sports and supported allowing puberty blocker and sex-change surgeries for minors.” Brown’s response has been to run an ad that, in reference to trans girls in sports, says, “In Ohio, this has already been banned.” The ad says Brown agrees with Republican Gov. Mike Dewine that “these decisions should be made by local sports leagues, not politicians.” Brown’s ad includes a news segment from a fact-checking journalist who says that a claim by GOP Senate nominee Bernie Moreno that Brown “voted to let transgender biological men participate in women’s sports is false.”

Though Brown’s ad doesn’t take a position against trans girls participating in sports — as Allred suggests when he says he’s against “boys playing girls sports” — his ad does suggest that he won’t fight for trans participation in sports, as he apparently believes politicians should have no say in the matter. He says transgender girls have “already been banned” from playing in girls' sports in Ohio, but, notably, he doesn’t say that it’s wrong that they were banned.

On top of that, the Brown ad’s uncritical use of the language “transgender biological men” in “women’s sports” suggests an acceptance of the premise that trans girls are not girls. It may seem like a sensible political strategy, given how radioactive the polling is about trans athletes; but characterizing trans girls as boys in a sports context would lead one to characterize them as such in other contexts, too.

After all, if trans girls are really boys when they’re playing sports, then they would also be considered boys in the bathroom, boys in medical offices and, thus, denied access to female hormones. If trans girls are boys when they’re playing sports, then trans women should be considered men in all contexts.

Contrary to the assertion from conservatives that their aim is to protect the integrity of sports competition, their focus on the trans athlete issue has never really been about fairness. The goal has been to establish a precedent that leads to the complete marginalization of trans women and girls.

It’s worrying to see Democrats running for Senate seemingly turn on trans people.

Left unsaid by both Senate candidates is what these ads mean for their previous support of the Equality Act. Allred co-sponsored the Equality Act in 2023 and voted for it when it passed the House in 2021. Brown co-sponsored the Senate version of the act in 2023. Neither bill came up for a full vote in their respective chambers last year. The Equality Act, as written, would guarantee equal rights for trans people under federal civil rights law. That includes educational opportunities like scholastic and collegiate sports.

It’s worrying to see Democrats running for Senate seemingly turn on trans people. This election is causing us enough stress already. As a community, we understand that Trump returning to the White House and Republicans having control of Congress would be a complete disaster for trans progress, but even more threatening to our rights would be Democrats abandoning the fight.

We intimately understand that the only thing standing between us and the GOP desire to “purge gender ideology from society” are Democrats, so the prospect of liberals abandoning us has loomed large throughout this campaign season.

Harris’ answer to Baier was milquetoast but it provided a marginal bit of relief, as did comments from her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, who, in an appearance on the "We Can Do Hard Things" podcast, pointed out that Republicans are leaning into attacking trans people:

“We see it now; the hate has shifted to the trans community. They see that as an opportunity. If you’re watching any sporting events right now, you see that Donald Trump’s closing arguments are to demonize a group of people for being who they are,” Walz said. “We’re out there trying to make the case that access to health care, a clean environment, manufacturing jobs and keeping your local hospital open are what people are really concerned about. They’re running millions of dollars of ads demonizing folks who are just trying to live their lives.”

For Harris’ part, she pledged to follow the law, which currently requires the government to provide gender-affirming care in a variety of contexts, including to people confined to federal prisons. But laws can change, and she didn’t commit to defending that policy if there’s an attempt to change it. Will she fight back if a Trump judge decides that incarcerated people shouldn’t receive such care? Will our rights be a legislative priority under a Harris White House?

We simply don’t know.

They’re running millions of dollars of ads demonizing folks who are just trying to live their lives. VICE-PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE TIM WALZ

Transphobia has historically been an election loser for Republicans dating to 2016, when then-North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory, who had signed the now-infamous trans bathroom bill, lost in a red wave election. In the 2022 midterms, conservative groups spent millions on anti-trans ads, only to get wiped out at the ballot box. But Democrats have inexplicably avoided a fight over trans issues this year.

A few weeks ago, an unnamed Harris adviser speaking to NBC News expressed admiration for the effectiveness of Trump’s anti-trans ad, if not the content, by describing it as “a killer ad.” The Washington Examiner reported last month that the Harris campaign had consulted the U.K. Labour Party for strategy help. That’s the party responsible for banning puberty blockers for all trans youth in Britain. Neither the comment from Harris’ adviser nor the reported consultation with the Labour Party inspires confidence in me as a trans person and voter who depends on Democrats for my rights in this country.

What makes the Democrats’ seeming capitulation worse is that there’s little evidence that any of the anti-trans ads are breaking through with voters. Polling shows that trans issues are of little importance except to a tiny handful of voters. Harris said as much in her Fox News interview, but Brown and Allred (who've previously supported the Equality Act) responded to the GOP ad blitz by softening their public support for trans rights in states where trans youths have been borderline tortured by GOP policies.

I worry that Democrats or Harris losing next month will not only result in a disastrous Trump policy for trans people but that Democratic consultants will pin those hypothetical losses on Democrats’ support for trans issues.

Democratic silence in the face of all-out Republican attacks on trans people already sends signals of softening support for our community. The presidential polls have been tightening lately, as happens in most elections in October, but that’s not the fault of trans people or the result of Trump’s transphobic ads.

Trans people like me await the outcome of this election with dread as we dream of the day we have a party that's willing to fight on our behalf and that will neither stay silent nor concede ground as the conservatives carry out their reckless hate campaign.
Elections can bring out the worst in people. The very nature of the thing is that we take sides – but when the stakes are high, sometimes we go too far, demonizing those we disagree with. Or maybe it all feels too overwhelming and we retreat so as to avoid engaging altogether.



But is that inevitable? Is there another way? In this season of the StoryCorps Podcast, we’re telling stories about people who decided to venture out of their corners and engage with others, even if it was a struggle. Those who chose to step up and embrace the difficulties of the world— because there was no other way to make it better.



Start listening to, "Stepping Up."
Sam Brown, left, and Sen. Jacky Rosen shake hands before a debate on Thursday, October 17, in Las Vegas. John Locher/AP

Democratic Sen. Jacky Rosen of Nevada and her GOP challenger Sam Brown faced off on Thursday in their only debate for a pivotal Senate seat.

Here are some of the topics they discussed:

Economy: The candidates were asked about the one specific policy they’d support to lower costs for consumers. Rosen said she would work to lower housing costs and promoted her legislation, the HOME Act, which would direct the federal government to investigate price gouging of residential rental and sale prices. On how she’d lower grocery prices, Rosen said that she’s working with the Federal Trade Commission to hold Kroger to account in its plans to acquire Albertsons.

Brown said the US needs to prioritize cheaper and more efficient energy, arguing that it will drive down costs. He then accused Rosen and Harris of driving up costs with prioritizing energy policies that reward green energy projects.

The candidates were asked about their parties’ standard bearers’ proposals to eliminate tax on workers’ tips and who should qualify for this policy.

“If you’re receiving tips, then you ought to be– not have to pay taxes on those tips,” said Brown. Rosen said that they should start with servers, bartenders and waitresses and address the sub-minimum wage, then we “can also have a discussion and analysis, and see if there other industries that also work heavily in tip.”

Immigration: Brown was pressed on whether he agrees with mass deportations as former President Donald Trump has promised on the campaign trail, and acknowledged it’s a “very big logistical undertaking.”

Rosen did not directly answer whether she believed that the next US president should keep some of the Trump administration immigration policies that were brought back by the Biden administration. She said that the first thing she’d pass is the bipartisan border security agreement that was blocked in Congress earlier this year.

She then criticized Trump’s plans for mass deportations, saying, “How would that happen? Mass deportations? Who would get caught in that? How many innocent people would get rounded up?”

Brown asked to clarify stance on Yucca Mountain: Brown insisted that he hasn’t change his position on the Yucca Mountain nuclear depository when asked about his comments back in 2022 where he suggested that it could be “an incredible opportunity” and another source of revenue for Nevada.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Brian Petruska can’t help but sound alarmed by the possibility of another Donald Trump presidency. He’s still witnessing the legal fallout from Trump’s first term.

“We’re looking at going back to pre-1930s labor law in this country,” Petruska, a lawyer for the Laborers’ International Union of North America, told HuffPost. “I’m not exaggerating. That’s literally what’s happening.”

Advertisement

Petruska was referring to efforts by employers — including Elon Musk, the richest man in the world and a surrogate for Trump amid his 2024 White House bid — to wreck the National Labor Relations Board, the federal agency established in 1935 that enforces collective bargaining rights.

Corporations like Musk’s SpaceX are challenging the constitutionality of the NLRB’s structure to defend themselves against charges of unfair labor practices. Some Trump-appointed judges have already shown they’re receptive to the companies’ argument, and the question could end up before the Supreme Court, where a conservative supermajority shaped by Trump would decide the board’s fate.

“We’re looking at going back to pre-1930s labor law in this country.” - Brian Petruska, attorney for the Laborers' International Union of North America

The way Petruska sees it, another four years under Trump would only bring more attacks on workers’ rights, and more judges willing to rule in corporations’ favor.

Advertisement

“The changes — not to engage in hyperbole — are potentially catastrophic,” he said. “Almost all worker protections you can think of are threatened. They’re on the table and they’re in danger.”

Trump has indicated that his election this year would lead to an immigration crackdown; a rollback of environmental protections; pardons for rioters convicted over the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection; and legal retribution for his political opponents, among other things. He hasn’t outlined his plan for workers’ rights, but it’s not hard to imagine what he would do with the NLRB, an independent agency run by presidential appointees.

The labor board has been a hotbed for progressive policy reforms under President Joe Biden. Its top prosecutor, General Counsel Jennifer Abruzzo, is often named in the same breath as Federal Trade Commission Chair Lina Khan as one of Biden’s most consequential appointments. Abruzzo’s policies have helped boost unionism and turned her into a star on the left — putting a bull’s-eye on her back for any incoming Republican administration.

Jennifer Abruzzo, the National Labor Relations Board's general counsel, has helped boost unionism with pro-worker reforms in the Joe Biden era. via Associated Press

Abruzzo outlined her philosophy while speaking to reporters Tuesday at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., describing the law as “pro-worker” rather than pro-union or pro-employer.

Advertisement

“We promote workers’ ability to elevate their voices and be heard and seek the respect and the dignity that they deserve,” she said, “and get a piece of the pie for the value that they add to their employers’ operations.”

It’s not exactly a vision shared by Trump, who recently praised Musk as someone who would fire striking workers, which is generally against the law.

Trump would almost certainly get rid of Abruzzo, perhaps on his first day in office, as the conservative transition blueprint Project 2025 recommends. With her would go the pieces of her agenda she hasn’t managed to implement yet, like banning mandatory anti-union meetings at work, chipping away at the use of noncompete agreements and preventing employers from permanently replacing strikers.

The NLRB has a five-member board separate from its general counsel, currently led by its Democratic chair, Lauren McFerran. As Biden did, Trump could flip party control of the board as its staggered seats opened up. Working in concert with an employer-friendly general counsel like Trump’s last one, the board could then reverse the most consequential reforms of the past four years.

“If you take on the job, per your congressional mandate, you are required to protect workers’ rights in this country.” - Jennifer Abruzzo, NLRB general counsel

Advertisement

That includes the board’s landmark Cemex decision, which discourages illegal union-busting and makes it easier for workers to form unions. The Biden board has also sped up the union election process, giving employers less time to run anti-union campaigns; extended collective bargaining rights to more workers, like independent contractors; and increased compensation for workers who are illegally fired. All such changes could be on the chopping block.

Asked by HuffPost if she worried that these kinds of policies would be undone by Trump appointees, Abruzzo steered clear of politics and tried to sound somewhat hopeful.

“If you take on the job, per your congressional mandate, you are required to protect workers’ rights in this country,” she said.

But a change in leadership could easily dampen the rise in workplace activism that’s taking place. Union election petitions have more than doubled in the Biden years as more workers try to organize their workplaces. Employees are also filing far more charges of unfair labor practices, showing a willingness to challenge their bosses.

There are a lot of factors that could play into that activism surge, like Americans’ increasingly favorable view of unions and a resilient labor market that has given employees leverage. But workers also might be more eager to assert their rights because they sense that the current labor board will have their backs, said Jon Schleuss, the president of The NewsGuild-CWA.

Advertisement

“I’ve seen the difference [between] the Trump administration and the Biden administration,” Schleuss said.

Republican Donald Trump, pictured here, praised SpaceX CEO Elon Musk as the kind of boss who would fire striking workers. via Associated Press

He noted that the labor board recently went to federal court seeking an injunction against the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette after it refused to bargain with the Guild and unilaterally cut workers’ health care benefits. That’s the sort of move Schleuss expects to see less of under a Trump board.

“We’ve been much more focused on filing unfair labor practice charges, because we know that there is a board and a general counsel and board agents who are interested in actually enforcing the [law],” he said.

Reversing policies isn’t the only way Trump and his appointees could undermine the labor board’s work — they could also try to cut its budget, push out existing staff members and let the agency atrophy, just as Trump’s first NLRB general counsel was accused of doing. To that end, Project 2025 calls for a hiring freeze at the board and other labor agencies. Inadequate funding and low staffing have already left the NLRB struggling to handle its rising caseload.

Advertisement

Of course, those problems seem less pressing than a constitutional challenge to the board itself heading toward a Supreme Court that’s steadily chipping away at the administrative state. Abruzzo said cases brought by companies like SpaceX were merely a distraction from their own alleged legal violations, but warned that everyone will pay a price if they manage to succeed.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

NEW YORK (AP) — Former President Donald Trump laced into Vice President Kamala Harris and other Democrats on Thursday in a pointed and at times bitter speech as he headlined the annual Al Smith charity dinner in New York.

Trump, in remarks that often felt more like a rally performance than a comedy routine, repeatedly criticized Harris over her decision to skip the event in a break from presidential tradition as she campaigned in Wisconsin.

Advertisement

She recorded a video that was played onscreen, but Trump called the decision “deeply disrespectful.”

““If you really wanted Vice President Harris to accept your invitation, I guess you should have told her the funds were going to bail out the looters and rioters in Minneapolis and she would have been here, guaranteed,” said Trump, urging Catholics to vote for him in response.

“You better remember that I’m here and she’s not,” he said.

The white-tie dinner raises millions of dollars for Catholic charities and has traditionally offered candidates from both parties the chance to trade lighthearted barbs, poke fun at themselves, and show that they can get along — or at least pretend to — for one night in the election’s final stretch.

It’s often the last time the two nominees share a stage before Election Day.

Trump delivered a number of one-liners that drew laughs. But he also questioned the mental fitness of Harris and President Joe Biden, commented on second gentleman Doug Emhoff’s extramarital affair during his previous marriage, and made a joke about transgender women that echoed his frequent mocking of trans athletes on the campaign trail.

He said at one point that he would offer a couple of self-deprecating jokes before abandoning the effort. “Nope. I’ve got nothing,” he said to laughs.

Advertisement

“I just don’t see the point of taking shots at myself when other people have been shooting at me,” he said, referencing his survival of two assassination attempts this year.

Of Biden, he said, “If the Democrats really wanted to have someone not be with us this evening, they would have sent Joe Biden.”

Later, he said the current occupant of the White House “can barely talk, barely put together two coherent sentences, who seems to have the mental faculties of a child. This is a person that has nothing going, no intelligence whatsoever. But enough about Kamala Harris.”

In the video she recorded for the occasion, Harris appeared alongside comedian and actress Molly Shannon, who reprised her long-running “Saturday Night Live” character Mary Katherine Gallagher, an awkward Catholic schoolgirl. She also poked fun at Trump for comments he made in Michigan, saying that mocking Catholics in the video would be “like criticizing Detroit in Detroit.”

Harris’ campaign had previously said that, with less than three weeks before Election Day, they wanted her to spend as much time as possible campaigning in battleground states that will decide the election, rather than detouring to heavily Democratic New York. Her team has told organizers that she would be willing to attend the dinner as president if she wins.

Advertisement

Melania Trump attended in a rare appearance

Trump was joined at the dinner by his wife, Melania, who has been an infrequent presence on the campaign trail.

The dais included a mix of Trump allies and foes, with various entanglements. They included New York Attorney General Letitia James, who brought a successful civil fraud case against Trump and his business. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who endorsed Trump after dropping his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination, attended with his wife, Cheryl Hines.

Also in attendance were New York’s embattled Mayor Eric Adams and other top city officials, as well as business leaders and sports and media personalities. Adams was charged last month with accepting illegal campaign contributions and lavish overseas trips from Turkish officials and businesspeople — a case that was mentioned repeatedly, including by Trump.

Trump has claimed, without evidence, that Adams was targeted by authorities because he criticized Biden’s migrant policies.

“Mayor Adams: Good luck with everything,” Trump said, adding that what Adams faces is “peanuts” compared to his own legal woes and predicting that he will win reelection nonetheless.

Advertisement

Trump: Mayor Adams, good luck with everything. They went after you, mayor. I said he just said something about the administration, he's going to be indicted any moment. And guess what happened? I think you're going to win, pic.twitter.com/3Dd3qlivGL — Acyn (@Acyn) October 18, 2024

He also went after former New York Mayor Bill de Blasio, who was repeatedly booed by the crowd.

“To be honest, he was a terrible mayor,” Trump said before offering a profanity at a religion-themed event. “I don’t give a s—- if this is comedy or not.”

Jim Gaffigan, who plays Tim Walz on ‘SNL,’ emceed

The dinner was emceed by comedian Jim Gaffigan, who plays Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Walz on “Saturday Night Live.”

Gaffigan has a history of criticizing Trump. In 2020, he wrote on X, then named Twitter, that, “We need to wake up. We need to call trump the con man and thief that he is.”

Gaffigan largely kept his focus on others Thursday, but offered several pointed quips, including when he referenced allegations that the Trump Organization in the 1970s discriminated against Black renters.

Advertisement

“If Vice President Harris wins this election, not only would she be the first female president, a Black woman would occupy the White House, a former Trump residence,” Gaffigan said. “Obviously you wouldn’t be renting to her. I mean, that would never happen anyway. Maybe if Doug did the signing.”

Gaffigan also mocked Harris for not coming to the dinner and joked about the Democrats replacing Biden with the vice president.

“The media has begun discussing the phenomena of secret Trump voters. I don’t know if you’ve heard about this — people who publicly say they would never vote for Trump, but then when they go in the voting booth, they do. It’s a small group. They’re called the Biden family,” he told the crowd.

Reprising his role

Trump’s tone echoed his appearance in 2016, when he was joined by his Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, and delivered a particularly nasty speech in which he called her “corrupt.”

“Hillary believes that it’s vital to deceive the people by having one public policy and a totally different policy in private,” he said to jeers. “For example, here she is tonight, in public, pretending not to hate Catholics.”

Advertisement

Mary Callahan Erdoes, vice chair of the foundation, alluded to that when she introduced Trump, suggesting she hoped for something less caustic.

“You never disappoint. Your wit is absolutely fabulous. And all of us together are going to hope for the best,” she said to laughs.

Trump, too, referenced the performance Thursday, saying that, in 2016, he “went overboard. That was like terrible. And I knew I was in trouble midway through.”

That didn’t stop him, however, from similar attacks, and repeatedly straying off-script.

The Harris campaign responded to Trump’s speech with a statement saying it would remind “Americans how unstable he’s become.”

“He may refuse to release his medical records, but every day he makes it clear to the American people that he is not up to the job,” said spokesperson Ammar Moussa.

Advertisement

Trump’s sense of humor is often cited by his supporters as key to his appeal. While he infamously glowered through former President Barack Obama’s jokes at his expense during the 2011 White House Correspondents Dinner, he also sometimes pokes fun at himself.

At several rallies this year, he has remarked on his hair after catching a glimpse of himself onscreen.

“What the hell can you do? There’s nothing I can do about it. We’re stuck with it,” he joked at a rally in Indiana, Pennsylvania, last month.

The Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner is named for the former New York governor, a Democrat who was the first Catholic to receive a major-party nomination for president when he unsuccessfully ran for the White House in 1928.

Advertisement
is a politics reporter at Vox, where she covers Congress and elections. Previously, she was a tech policy reporter at Politico and an editorial fellow at the Atlantic.

Two men wearing shirts that say “MAGA Black” stand up after being called on to do so by former president and current Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump as he speaks during a campaign event on August 3, 2024, in Atlanta. Elijah Nouvelage/Washington Post/Getty Images

For years, Black men have been an integral part of the Democratic coalition.

In 2012, 87 percent of Black men backed former President Barack Obama; in 2016, 82 percent backed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton; and in 2020, 79 percent backed President Joe Biden, according to NBC exit polls. This year, 70 percent have said they’re backing Vice President Kamala Harris, per a recent New York Times/Siena poll.

As those numbers make clear, the group overwhelmingly supports Democrats, but their loyalty has begun to wane, a shift that stretches across the last several campaigns. That attrition has something to do with the candidates themselves, but also with voters’ longstanding disillusionment with the party. Despite being one of Democrats’ most loyal voting blocs, some Black voters have felt ignored and taken for granted as campaign promises and change have been slow to materialize.

“People are disappointed with the Democrats,” says David Childs, a history professor and director of the Black Studies Program at Northern Kentucky University. “A lot of people feel disenfranchised. They don’t feel like they have a voice.”

An added twist is some evidence that the Democrats’ leftward shift on social issues may also be a factor. Reviewing polling on respondents’ views on LGBTQ issues, Thomas Edsall of the New York Times noted that views expressed by Black voters in one survey suggested that “some aspects of Democratic liberal orthodoxy contribute to the exodus of conservative minorities from the party.”

The erosion Democrats have seen could be attributed to any number of reasons. But broadly, here are three theories that can explain why some Black men are feeling cool toward the party this cycle:

1) A sense of economic stagnation

In the last four years, Black Americans have faced the same economic challenges as everyone else, while also navigating racial wealth and wage gaps that mean many Black families feel the effects of rising costs and inflation more keenly than their white counterparts.

“In focus groups and conversations with party leaders, Black men have stated repeatedly that their material conditions have remained unchanged under Democratic and Republican presidential administrations,” the New York Times’s Maya King reports. And as costs have risen during the Biden administration — mostly due to inflation — that feeling of stagnation has only grown more pronounced.

Such sentiments have prompted some voters to weigh whether voting for an alternative option — like Trump — could help produce a different outcome.

“Nothing has come to fruition. Look at the schools, the playgrounds, the parks. Downtown is struggling. In our community, typically, we vote for Democrats. How has that panned out for us?” Ahmad Taylor, an undecided Michigan voter who previously voted for Biden, told the Washington Post’s Michael Brice-Saddler.

Multiple Covid-19 aid packages also helped stem the economic pain some voters experienced because of the pandemic during the Trump administration and the beginning of the Biden administration. These included stimulus checks, small business funding, and expansions to unemployment payments.

A number of these payments, however, expired during the Biden administration because Republicans in Congress balked at passing a continuation of programs like an expanded child tax. That’s left voters dealing with both higher costs on consumer goods and a drop-off in aid that could help soften the blow.

Because the first wave of stimulus checks was sent out during the Trump administration and also bore his name, some voters have been under the mistaken impression that he’s solely to credit for them. That idea has taken hold even though the aid was passed by a Democratic House and a Republican Senate, and even though stimulus payments were distributed during the Biden administration as well.

2) Resistance to the growing social liberalism of the Democratic Party

Another dynamic at play is more conservative attitudes among some Black voters on social issues. In particular, as Democrats have shifted leftward on LGBTQ rights — just over a decade ago, Obama was hesitant to back same-sex marriage — some of these voters have chafed at the party’s current stance.

Charlamagne Tha God, an influential media personality and one of the hosts of the syndicated radio show The Breakfast Club, has described the ad as “effective.”

Other voters have spoken of Democrats’ support for gay rights as a problem. “That’s when I left Democrats alone,” one voter, identified as J, told NPR, noting that the legalization of same-sex marriage, a milestone made possible by the Supreme Court but celebrated by Democrats, was his tipping point away from the party.

Those socially conservative viewpoints can extend to gender as well. When it comes to Harris’s candidacy, specifically, sexism might well be a real issue for some voters, including Black men.

“There are traditional values that come out of a lot of the Black homes that are still around,” Childs says. “Even though many Black males were raised by a mother, by a matriarch, there’s still this notion that women have a certain place in our society.”

Cliff Albright, executive director of the Black Voters Matter Fund, notes that he’s heard the sentiment from a small percentage of voters he’s spoken to. “You got some percentage that will come out and tell you, like in your face: ‘I don’t think a woman should be president,’” he says.

3) An election cycle rife with disinformation

A problem that only amplifies Democrats’ struggles is the rise of disinformation, multiple experts posited.

Childs notes that influencers on the right have seized on real concerns Black men may have — like economic frustration — to advance false messages about how Harris and Biden haven’t accomplished anything to help members of this group.

In one example that Charlamagne Tha God cited during a town hall with Harris this week, he referenced a viral clip from a Harris interview with the Grio that was taken out of context and has been cut so it looks like she’s saying she won’t do anything specifically for Black people.

These claims often begin with pundits on the right, or even Trump himself, and get amplified over social media by celebrities, podcasters, and other prominent personalities. The singer Janet Jackson, for instance, recently elevated lies that Trump had told questioning Harris’s ethnicity.

Multiple surveys, including an August NAACP poll, have found a stark generational divide among Black men, with voters under 50 far less likely to support Harris than those over 50. Albright believes this points to the effect disinformation on social media has had, as younger voters are more likely to get news from these sources.

“It’s like a living organism, this disinformation. It grows from a cell, and then it reaches the point where it takes on a life of its own, and it just grows all kinds of tentacles,” Albright tells Vox. “And … it’s touching millions of Black voters.”

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
Washington CNN —

Former President Donald Trump is lying about a whole bunch of topics in the final month of the presidential election. But he is lying most frequently, by far, about immigration.

Trump’s October rally speeches and interviews have featured a dizzying barrage of false claims on the subject – about immigrants and crime, about Vice President Kamala Harris’ record on immigration policy, about Trump’s own record on immigration policy and about how foreign countries are supposedly “dumping” their most unwanted citizens into the US.

These claims range from exaggerations to wholly fictional tales. Here is a fact check of at least 28 distinct false claims he has made about immigration in the last two weeks alone, some of which he has repeated over and over.

Harris’ border role: Trump, criticizing Harris, repeatedly claimed that President Joe Biden made her “border czar” and said that “she was in charge of the border.” Biden never made Harris “border czar,” a label the White House has always emphasized is inaccurate, and never put her in charge of border security, a responsibility of Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas. In reality, Biden gave Harris a more limited immigration-related assignment in 2021, asking her to lead diplomacy with El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras in an attempt to address the conditions that prompted their citizens to try to migrate to the United States.

Harris’ border visits: Trump, speaking about Harris and the border, repeated his false claim that “she never even went there.” Harris did go to the border as vice president, in Texas in mid-2021 and then again in Arizona last month; many Republicans had criticized Harris prior to the 2021 visit for not having gone, and some later argued that she didn’t go frequently enough, but the claim that she “never” went has not been true for more than three years.

Harris’ approach to the border: Trump falsely claimed of Harris: “She was saying the other day, ‘Yes, oh yes, we want to have a border.’ The first time she ever said it. She almost threw up when she said it.” This is nonsense; Harris has never said the US shouldn’t have a border, and it’s not even true that “the other day” was the first time she said the US should have a secure border. For example, she said in a television appearance while running for president in 2019: “We have to have a secure border. But I am in favor of saying that we are not going to treat people who are undocumented and cross the border as criminals.”

Harris, migrants and criminals: Trump again falsely described a recently released set of statistics about immigrants in the US with homicide convictions, claiming again that the figures are specifically about people who entered the country during the Biden-Harris administration: “It came out that 13,099 were let in, during their administration – they tried to say longer, wrong: over the last three-and-a-half years – 13,000-plus people came in: murderers.”

In reality, the Department of Homeland Security and independent experts have noted that these figures are about people who entered the country over decades, including during Trump’s own administration, not just under Biden and Harris. You can read more here.

The people on the ICE non-detained list: Trump repeated his false claim that “under Kamala Harris, 13,099 illegal alien convicted murderers are roaming free in the United States.” The Department of Homeland Security has made clear that this figure includes people who are currently incarcerated in federal, state and local prisons and jails; they are on the Immigration and Customs Enforcement “non-detained” list because they aren’t in the custody of immigration authorities in particular. You can read more here.

A Biden immigration bill and citizenship﻿: Trump denounced an unspecified immigration bill from the Biden administration, falsely claiming “it would have allowed millions of people to become citizens right away.” The bill Biden proposed to Congress at the beginning of his administration in 2021 would have offered a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented immigrants, but over eight years. And the bipartisan 2024 border bill that Trump helped to kill offered a pathway to citizenship for tens of thousands of immigrants from Afghanistan who arrived in the US with temporary status in the wake of the US withdrawal in 2021, but that’s not “millions,” and, again, it wouldn’t have made them citizens immediately.

Migration and Black unemployment: Trump, arguing that undocumented immigrants are taking the jobs of Black and Hispanic Americans, falsely claimed Saturday of African Americans: “Their unemployment rate is through the roof. Wait ‘til you hear the numbers.” The Black or African American unemployment rate declined in September, to 5.7%. That is only a bit higher than the lowest rate of the Trump presidency, 5.3%, in two months of 2019. It’s also lower than the pre-pandemic February 2020 rate, also under Trump, of 6.1%.

FEMA and migrants: Trump falsely claimed of the Federal Emergency Management Agency: “They have no money. You know where they gave the money? To illegal immigrants coming in.” He also said, “They spent all their funds; they have no funds to take care…”

This is false in two ways. FEMA does have money for the immediate responses to Hurricane Helene and Hurricane Milton, though a string of recent disasters has depleted its disaster relief fund; the fund had about $11 billion remaining as of Wednesday. And FEMA did not give all of its disaster relief money to undocumented people; rather, as mandated by Congress, FEMA also administers an entirely separate pool of money for sheltering migrants.

An immigration chart and migration levels: Trump repeatedly made his false claim that his favorite chart about migration numbers at the southern border – which he had fortunately turned his head to look at when a gunman tried to kill him at a campaign rally in July – has an arrow pointing to “the day I left office,” which, he said, had the lowest level of border crossings “in the recorded history of our country.”

The chart doesn’t show that. In fact, the arrow actually points to April 2020, when Trump still had more than eight months left in his term and global migration had slowed to a trickle because of the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. After hitting a roughly three-year low (not an all-time low) in April 2020, migration numbers at the southern border increased each month through the end of Trump’s term.

The number of migrants: Trump, speaking about migration, repeated his false claim that “21 million people came in over the last three years, with them.” Through August, the country had recorded about 10.3 million nationwide “encounters” with migrants during the Biden-Harris administration, including millions who were rapidly expelled from the country; even adding in so-called “gotaways” who evaded detection, estimated by House Republicans as being roughly 2 million, there’s no way the total is “21 million.”

The border wall: Trump repeated his false claim that he built “571 miles of wall” on the southern border. That’s a significant exaggeration; official government data shows 458 miles were built under Trump – including both wall built where no barriers had existed before and wall built to replace previous barriers.

Trump’s wall promises: Trump made the false claim about having built “571 miles of wall,” then added an additional false claim that the number of miles he had wanted to add to the wall, before the Biden administration halted construction, was “much more than I said I was going to build.” He said, “I was going to add 200 miles more. I didn’t promise to do that, but I thought it would be good.” In reality, when he ran for president in 2015 and 2016, Trump regularly said “we need” 1,000 miles of wall; adding 200 miles to the 458 miles that were built, or even adding the 280 miles the federal government said were planned for construction but not yet built when Trump left office, would be less than he had spoken about building.

Mexico and the wall: Trump, who emphasized during his 2016 campaign that Mexico would pay for the wall, falsely claimed: “Mexico did pay for it.” He added, “You know, they gave us thousands and thousands of soldiers. They paid more.”

Mexico did not pay for the border wall, which was funded solely with billions of dollars in US government funds; the Trump administration directed roughly $16 billion toward the project (though not all of it was spent). While Mexico did deploy thousands of security personnel to thwart migrants heading to the US, Mexico paying for this initiative simply isn’t the same as Mexico paying for the wall.

Immigration judges and other countries: Trump, criticizing the fact that asylum seekers who arrive at the border have access to a US legal process before they are deported, falsely claimed that “No other country has judges at the border.” In reality, the US is far from the only country to let asylum seekers make their case before judges or legal tribunals.

“This statement is patently false,” James Hathaway, then a law professor and Director of the Program in Refugee and Asylum Law at the University of Michigan, told this reporter during Trump’s presidency in response to a previous version of Trump’s claim. “It is completely routine in other countries that, like the U.S., have signed the UN refugee treaties for asylum-seekers to have access to the domestic legal system to make a protection claim (and to be allowed in while the claim is pending).”

The number of US immigration judges: Trump falsely claimed, “We have thousands of judges at the border.” The US had 725 immigration judges nationwide as of the first quarter of the 2024 fiscal year.

Trump’s comments about immigrants in Springfield, Ohio, “eating the pets”: Asked at a Univision town hall if he really believes Haitian immigrants in Springfield are eating other residents’ pets, Trump said, “This was just reported. I was just saying what was reported; that’s been reported – and eating other things, too, that they’re not supposed to be. But this is – all I do is report.” He added, “That’s been in the newspapers and reported pretty broadly.”

It has not actually been broadly reported that immigrants in Springfield are eating other residents’ pets. In fact, no news outlet has reported any proof of this having actually happened; Ohio Sen. JD Vance, Trump’s running mate, acknowledged after promoting such claims in September that although he had heard the claims from his constituents, “it’s possible, of course, that all of these rumors will turn out to be false.” And when Trump claimed at the presidential debate in September that “in Springfield, they’re eating the dogs…they’re eating the cats….they’re eating the pets of the people that live there,” he did not say he was merely citing reports he had seen.

The legal status of immigrants in Springfield: Trump falsely claimed, “They just dropped 30,000 illegal aliens in Springfield, Ohio.”

This is false in more than one way. While we don’t know the immigration status of each and every Haitian immigrant in Springfield, the community is, on the whole, in the country lawfully. The Springfield city website says, “YES, Haitian immigrants are here legally, under the Immigration Parole Program. Once here, immigrants are then eligible to apply for Temporary Protected Status (TPS).” Republican Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine wrote in a New York Times op-ed about Springfield in September that the Haitian immigrants “are there legally” and that, as a Trump-Vance supporter, he is “saddened” by the candidates’ disparagement of “the legal migrants living in Springfield.”

Second, nobody “dropped” the immigrants in Springfield; the city’s Haitian residents were not sent there by a government resettlement program. Rather, they independently decided to move to the city because of employment opportunities, affordable housing and the presence of a Haitian community, among other factors.

And while there is no official tally of the number of immigrants in Springfield, Trump’s “30,000” figure exceeds local estimates. The website for the city of Springfield says there are an estimated 12,000 to 15,000 immigrants in the county that includes Springfield, where the total population is about 138,000. Chris Cook, the county’s health commissioner, said in July that his team estimated the best number was 10,000 to 12,000 Haitian residents in the county.

More about immigrants in Springfield: Trump claimed that immigrants in Springfield are on “probation,” and he added, “Probation is for prisoners.” This is false in two ways.

First, Trump got his terms wrong. Many Haitians came into the country under a Biden-Harris administration parole program – not “probation” – that gives permission to enter the US to vetted participants with US sponsors. And though the word “parole” is most commonly used in the context of criminal prisoners who are let out early on certain conditions, in the context of immigration policy, “parole” does not mean that someone was let out of prison or had ever been in prison.

Rather, as the federal government explains on its website, “The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) allows the secretary of homeland security to use their discretion to parole any noncitizen applying for admission into the United States temporarily for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit.” The government has used the parole authority in the past to grant entry to certain people fleeing crises in Cuba, Vietnam, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Lebanon and elsewhere.

Venezuela, prisons and migration: Trump falsely claimed, “In Venezuela, many countries, they’re emptying their prisons into our country.” This is false. Trump has never corroborated this claim about Venezuela, let alone “many countries,” and experts have told CNN, PolitiFact and FactCheck.org that they know of no evidence for it.

“We have no evidence that the Venezuelan government is emptying its prisons or mental health institutions to send them outside the country, in other words, to the U.S. or any other country,” Roberto Briceño-León, founder and director of the Venezuelan Observatory of Violence, an independent organization that tracks violence in the country, said in an email to CNN in June, after Trump made similar claims.

Venezuela and migrant buses: Adding another colorful story about Venezuela, Trump falsely claimed that “they take the criminal gangs from Caracas off the streets and they bus them into the United States and drop them.” This is false. There is no evidence of Venezuelan authorities somehow busing gang members into the US.

Migrants and “the Congo”: Trump repeated his false claim that “a huge number” of migrants are “coming out of jails in the Congo,” explaining that this was because foreign countries are deliberately “releasing their prison populations into our country.” Trump and his campaign have never been able to provide any proof for this claim about “the Congo,” and both the Democratic Republic of Congo and the neighboring Republic of Congo told CNN in March that it is false. Experts on both countries also told CNN in March that they had not seen any evidence of Congolese prisons being emptied, let alone evidence of either country somehow having brought ex-prisoners into the US as Trump has claimed.

The world prison population: Trump repeated his false claim that “the prison population all over the world is down, because they put them in our country.” The recorded global prison population increased from October 2021 to April 2024, from at least about 10.77 million people to at least about 10.99 million people, according to the World Prison Population List compiled by experts in the United Kingdom.

“I do a daily news search to see what’s going on in prisons around the world and have seen absolutely no evidence that any country is emptying its prisons and sending them all to the US,” Helen Fair, co-author of the prison population list and research fellow at the Institute for Crime & Justice Policy Research at Birkbeck, University of London, said in June, when Trump made a similar claim.

Migrants and mental health facilities: Trump repeated his false claim about large numbers of migrants entering the US from mental health facilities foreign governments had deliberately emptied: “They’re coming in, but they’re also coming in largely, in tremendous numbers, coming in, out of mental institutions; they’re emptying out mental institutions, they’re emptying out insane asylums.” Trump’s own campaign hasn’t been able to substantiate these claims, and experts say they have found no evidence for them.

A gang and Colorado: Trump falsely claimed at a rally in Colorado that a Venezuelan gang called Tren de Aragua is “taking over your state,” suggesting that the city of Aurora has been “conquered” and promising to “liberate Colorado” if elected again.

The gang has members in the state, but it has not come close to taking over any town or city – let alone Colorado as a whole. Republican Aurora Mayor Mike Coffman said in a September joint statement, issued with the conservative chair of the city council’s public safety committee, that the gang “has not ‘taken over’ the city” and that problems with the gang “experienced at a select few properties do not apply to the city as a whole or large portions of it.” Coffman noted that the city’s police department had linked 10 people to the gang and arrested eight.

Migrants and towns: Trump, talking about the migrants who have entered the country under Biden and Harris, promised to “rescue…every town across America that has been invaded and conquered,” adding, “They’ve been conquered; they’re conquering the towns.” This is nonsense; no US town has been “conquered” by migrants.

The word “caravan”: Talking about migrant caravans, Trump repeated his false claim that he invented the term: “The caravan. I made up that name too. I’m good at names.” Trump did not come up with the word “caravan,” either in general – the word came to English in the 16th century – or in using it to describe groups of migrants traveling together toward the US border; before he first used it in that context in a 2018 tweet, it had been used by various others in the same context in the days and weeks prior, including in a BuzzFeed News feature article headlined, “A Huge Caravan Of Central Americans Is Headed For The US, And No One In Mexico Dares To Stop Them.”

Central American countries and deportations: Trump repeated his long-debunked story about how Latin American countries including Honduras – he has previously named Guatemala and El Salvador as well – refused to let the US deport criminals back there under President Barack Obama, even refusing to let deportation flights land on their runways. In 2016, Obama’s last calendar year in office, neither Honduras nor the other two countries were on the list of countries that Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) considered “recalcitrant” (uncooperative) in accepting the return of their citizens from the US; in the 2016 fiscal year, ICE reported that Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador ranked second, third and fourth for the country of citizenship of people being removed from the US.

Harris and “missing” children: Trump falsely claimed that Harris “lost 325,000 migrant children” and declared that “most of them are dead, in my opinion”; agreeing with a comment from someone in his rally crowd, he added that “all” of them might be dead.

There is no basis for Trump’s claim that even “most” of these children are dead – or for his claim that Harris was responsible for all of the children.

He appeared to be referring to an August report from the Homeland Security Department’s Office of Inspector General, which said ICE reported more than 32,000 unaccompanied migrant children failed to appear as scheduled for immigration court hearings after being released or transferred out of custody between fiscal years 2019 and 2023 – a period that, notably, includes two years and four months under the Trump administration. The report also said that 291,000 unaccompanied migrant children during this period were not given notices to appear in court.

The report said that ICE has “no assurances” these children “are safe from trafficking, exploitation, or forced labor.” But it did not definitively assert that any of them were being exploited – let alone that most of them are dead, a claim experts say is nonsense.

Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, senior fellow at the American Immigration Council, told CNN in a message this summer: “Long story short, no, there are not 320,000 kids missing. 32,000 kids missed court. That doesn’t mean they’re missing, it means they missed court (either because their sponsor didn’t bring them or they are teenagers who didn’t want to show up). The remaining 291,000 cases mentioned by the OIG are cases where ICE hasn’t filed the paperwork to start their immigration court cases.”
CNN —

Over the first half of October, former President Donald Trump and his allies poured more than $21 million into television ads attacking Vice President Kamala Harris over her past support of certain rights for transgender people – a message they have spread during nationally televised NFL games, college football broadcasts and in battleground states.

It’s a staggering sum to spend on a topic that most voters say isn’t a top priority for them this election. But Trump’s campaign is betting any voters still choosing between the two candidates can be swayed to take sides in a cultural fight that has torn apart state houses and school boards in recent years – one that has put tremendous focus on an incredibly small, marginalized group that already faces discrimination-based violence. Republicans in key Senate races have mirrored that messaging as part of a playbook painting Democrats as out of touch with most voters.

At the center of the ads are positions, first reported by CNN’s KFile last month, that Harris took as a candidate for president during the 2020 primary, when she supported taxpayer-funded gender-affirming care for detained immigrants and federal prisoners, as already required by federal law.

“Kamala’s agenda is they/them, not you,” says one ad, referring to the pronouns used by some transgender and non-binary individuals. The Trump campaign put nearly $14 million behind the ad in the first two weeks of the month.

Asked by Fox News’ Bret Baier on Wednesday about her current stance, Harris said she would follow the law, while alluding to a New York Times report that outlined the Bureau of Prisons provided gender-affirming services under the Trump administration. The Trump campaign disputed the report.

Even before launching his 2024 presidential campaign, Trump escalated his rhetoric against the LGBTQ community – specifically transgender Americans – in ways that he largely avoided in the lead up to his 2016 win and throughout his four years in Washington. At an appearance in July 2022, Trump voiced his opposition to transgender women participating in women’s athletics, marveling at the applause it generated and insisting his advisers had advocated against including it in his remarks.

“They said don’t do it,” Trump said. “And it gets the biggest hand. It’s crazy.”

Early in his latest White House bid, Trump vowed to punish hospitals that provide gender-affirming care to minors — a rare outcome that is typically pursued after counseling and other prescribed treatments. He would also target schools and teachers that inform children they could be “trapped in the wrong body,” his campaign website said. He has recently falsely claimed that schools are secretly sending children for gender-affirming surgeries. And his riff on transgender women competing in sports still draws the loudest support at his rallies.

Until now, however, much of that rhetoric had been aimed at his supporters. So far in October, out of a total of about $66 million that the Trump campaign and allied outside groups spent on broadcast TV ads, roughly a third – $21 million – went to ads about “LGBTQ rights,” according to data from the campaign advertisement tracker AdImpact. Nearly all feature clips of Harris from four years ago expressing support for pro-transgender policies.

The ads outpaced nearly every other topic Republicans have put in advertisements trying to sway the public during a critical closing stretch of the race – ahead of crime, inflation and immigration, and behind only taxation. As pro-Trump advertisers have put more money behind ads attacking transgender policies, economic messaging has also been a consistent, though shifting, point of emphasis. In August, inflation was a top issue, referenced in nearly a quarter of GOP advertising by broadcast spending. But in the months since, as inflation has continued to slow, that’s been supplanted by other issues such as taxation, which has risen to the top issue in pro-Trump advertising in October.

The top ad from the Trump campaign in October so far is an attack that calls Harris’ support for laws requiring prisoners to be provided with medical care, including gender-affirming care, “insane.” Another similar ad from the Trump campaign, with more than $2 million behind it this month, echoes that line. “It’s hard to believe, but it’s true. Even the liberal media was shocked Kamala supports taxpayer-funded sex changes for prisoners and illegal aliens,” the ad says.

Harris’ campaign did not respond to a request for comment. But asked to respond to one of the Trump campaign’s ads during Wednesday’s Fox interview, Harris argued that Trump’s team was focused on an issue most voters care little about.

“I think he spent $20 million on those ads trying to create a sense of fear in the voters,” she said, “because he actually has no plan in this election that is about focusing on the needs of the American people.”

Vice President Kamala Harris takes part in an interview on Fox News. From Fox News

For months, Trump’s most conservative allies have urged the former president to make the issue a centerpiece of his outreach to undecided voters. They have argued, publicly and behind-the-scenes, that parents especially could be swayed by his opposition to transgender treatments for minors and that Democrats had grown increasingly uneasy defending their support of pro-transgender policies around athletics and children.

“Politics is part of culture, it’s not downstream,” said Terry Schilling, the president of one of those groups, American Principles Project. “And if you want to win on an issue, the campaigns have to be running on it.”

Groups fighting for transgender rights have seen these attacks before. Schilling’s group spent millions of dollars on advertising in Kentucky in 2022 attacking incumbent Democratic Gov. Andy Beshear over transgender policies. Beshear won reelection. Democrats also prevailed in Virginia the next year when Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin tried to turn the statehouse red in part by advocating for parental rights – a phrase regularly deployed by those advocating for the removal of some media informing gender identity and sexuality and topics in schools or for more transparency if their child comes out in school. Virginians that year also elected the commonwealth’s first transgender state senator.

Rodrigo Heng-Lehtinen, executive director of the National Center for Transgender Equality, said Republicans were tapping into an unsuccessful playbook out of “desperation.”

“Truly, universally it didn’t work,” Heng-Lehtinen said. “Voters mostly don’t rank transgender issues high on their priority list.”

A recent Gallup survey of registered voters indeed found just 38% said a candidate’s position on “transgender rights” was “extremely” or “very” important to them, ranking last out of about 20 topics.

But American sentiment around transgender issues is mixed, with some polls suggesting more people side with Trump. A growing number of Americans are opposed to transgender athletes competing on teams that correspond to their gender identity, according to Gallup, including 67% of independent voters. And a slim majority, 51%, believe changing one’s gender is “morally wrong,” the poll found, an illustration of the deep divide.

Still, far fewer Americans think government should intervene in the matter, and only 34% of independents favor banning certain medical treatments.

Trump’s advisers, though, eventually came to believe that the former president wouldn’t risk alienating moderate voters who support LGBTQ rights if he focused his opposition on polices that affect children.

“The issue has defined the modern-day Democratic Party and is a major part of their party platform,” said Trump co-campaign manager Chris LaCivita. “They, however, have chosen not to make it part of their campaign. We decided to do it for them.”

Pro-Trump groups have followed his campaign’s lead. Preserve America – a leading super PAC that has received millions from megadonor Miriam Adelson – went up with a pair of spots earlier this month threading several key GOP attack lines together, referencing transgender stances along with concerns about inflation and immigration.

A Wisconsin voter featured in one of the ads called Harris’ past transgender positions “not just liberal, it’s insane.” Another spot running in the Badger State raising the same issue includes a voter who says, “Seriously. Have these people lost their mind?”

MAGA Inc., the super PAC that has spent the most money supporting Trump’s 2024 campaign, also launched an ad this month hammering Harris, echoing the Trump campaign ad almost exactly, saying, “Crazy liberal Kamala’s for they/them. President Trump is for you.”

Democrats in the presidential race have offered no defensive response. According to AdImpact tracking data, $0 in Democratic broadcast TV ad spending went to ads mentioning LGBTQ rights during the first two weeks of October.

Very few Democrats running for federal office have gone on the air in defense. Rep. Colin Allred – who’s trying to unseat Sen. Ted Cruz in Texas – became the first Senate candidate to do so when he produced a TV ad last week, in which he said, “I don’t want boys playing girls sports or any of this ridiculous stuff that Ted Cruz is saying.”

Days later, Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown, also went up with an ad pushing back on the GOP attacks. “The truth is, in Ohio, this has already been banned. Sherrod Brown agrees with Governor DeWine. These decisions should be made by local sports leagues, not politicians,” Brown’s ad says.

The attacks that Allred and Brown have faced are reflective of the issue’s emergence in Senate campaigns in addition to the presidential race.

GOP campaigns and groups targeting the 10 races seeing the most advertising spent about 18% – $17.7 million – of their broadcast TV advertising budget on ads referencing LGBTQ rights during the first two weeks of October, which ranked third among all the issues referenced in their ads, according to AdImpact data.

In the race for the White House, Schilling said the silence from Democrats in the face of Trump’s advertising onslaught is telling.

“The beauty of this issue is Democrats are damned if they do or damned if they don’t,” Schilling said. “If they do what Allred is doing, they lose their base. If they double down on it, then they lose the voters in the middle and even a good portion of their base.”

But Heng-Lehtinen said he had “confidence” that Harris and other Democratic candidates will “do the right thing in supporting their transgender constituencies and their families.” He said his organization has worked in close collaboration with the Harris campaign, including for a “Trans Folks for Harris” virtual event when she replaced President Joe Biden as the nominee.

“The campaigns – whether Kamala Harris or these Senate races, Allred not withstanding – are not dignifying this with a response, which I think is wise,” Heng-Lehtinen said. “This is not the top issue of most voters. They are working to win the majority of American votes and therefore they’re running on issues that most Americans are concerned about.”

CNN’s Jennifer Agiesta, Alayna Treene, Kate Sullivan and Kristen Holmes contributed to this report.
Nearly a decade into his career in politics, Donald Trump has consistently argued that his potential rivals shouldn’t be permitted to stand between him and power. In October 2015, for example, the Republican said Hillary Clinton shouldn’t be “allowed” to run for president. In February 2016, Trump said Ted Cruz was “not allowed” to run for president, either. A month later, the future president said John Kasich shouldn’t have been “allowed” to run against him in a GOP primary.

Ahead of Election Day 2020, Trump said Joe Biden shouldn’t have been “allowed” to run for president. In July 2024, he said Kamala Harris shouldn’t be “allowed” to run, either.

Four months later, as a HuffPost report noted, the former president insisted that the Democratic vice president should now be “forced off” the campaign trail.

In a Thursday post on his Truth Social platform, former President Donald Trump argued that Vice President Kamala Harris ‘should be investigated and forced off the Campaign,’ thereby allowing President Joe Biden ‘to take back his rightful place’ at the top of the Democratic ticket. Trump did not specify what he believes Harris — who became the Republican’s rival in the White House race after Biden dropped his reelection bid this summer — should be investigated for.

In recent weeks, as the GOP nominee has struggled to come up with a coherent closing message, he’s fixated on a handful of preoccupations, including his desire to see Biden return to the ballot, his baseless “60 Minutes” conspiracy theory and his insistence that Harris should stop running against him.

Remarkably, in a pair of odd online missives, Trump managed to tie all three threads together in one weird package.

The harangue began with this item, in which the Republican called for “60 Minutes” to be “IMMEDIATELY TAKEN OFF THE AIR,” argued that CBS should “LOSE ITS LICENSE” to broadcast, said Harris “should be investigated and forced off the Campaign,” and concluded that Biden should “allowed to take back his rightful place” on the Democratic ticket.

Less than a minute later, Trump added strange new details to his “60 Minutes” conspiracy theory — he believes CBS News producers might have “‘CREATED’ many additional new answers for her” as part of the broadcast — before wrapping things up with a veiled threat.

“RELEASE THE TAPES FOR THE GOOD OF AMERICA,” the GOP nominee wrote. “We can do it the nice way, or the hard way!”

What, exactly, would “the hard way” entail? He didn’t say, and your guess is as good as mine, though the phrasing was certainly ominous.

There’s no point in going line by line through Trump’s rants, pointing out every error of fact and judgment, though it’s difficult to brush off the Republican’s insistence that his major-party opponent “should be investigated and forced off the Campaign,” despite the fact that she’s done nothing wrong.

It’s one thing to say that a rival candidate is undeserving of support, but it’s far more pernicious to argue that a rival shouldn’t even be permitted to seek support. The former is normal; the latter is authoritarian.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
There’s no evidence that the Kremlin has prepared talking points for Donald Trump to share with the American public. But if the former president were, hypothetically, receiving rhetorical scripts from Moscow, the Republican candidate would probably sound an awful lot like he sounds now.

The New York Times reported, for example, on the GOP nominee’s latest comments regarding Russia’s war in Ukraine.

Former President Donald J. Trump blamed President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine for Russia’s invasion of his country in a podcast interview released on Thursday, inverting the facts of the largest military action in Europe since the Second World War. ... Mr. Trump, in a rambling, muddled answer on a conservative podcast, was criticizing President Biden’s leadership when he abruptly brought up his skepticism over the administration’s continued military aid to Ukraine.

“I think Zelensky is one of the greatest salesmen I’ve ever seen,” Trump said, repeating a familiar refrain. “Every time he comes in, we give him $100 billion. Who else got that kind of money in history? There’s never been. And that doesn’t mean I don’t want to help him, because I feel very badly for those people. But he should never have let that war start.”

An analysis by The Washington Post explained, “Even in the context of Trump’s long-standing obsequiousness to Putin, it’s hard to understand how Zelensky would have prevented having his nation be invaded. He could, in theory, have taken the approach that many Trump allies have since endorsed: simply agreeing to cede some or all of Ukraine to Russia, a move that would have prevented the damage incurred to the country’s buildings but amplified the damage done to its sovereignty.”

Later, in the same podcast interview, Trump went from blaming Zelenskyy to saying he also blames his own country’s government, claiming that President Joe Biden helped “instigate” the conflict.

The only person Trump didn’t blame was Vladimir Putin — who, incidentally, is the one person responsible for the deadly and disastrous conflict.

The comments came just days after the former American president refused to say whether he’s had multiple, secret conversations with Putin since leaving the White House, though he added, “But I will tell you that if I did, it’s a smart thing.”

Which came on the heels of allegations that the former Republican president, while in office, secretly sent Covid-19 testing equipment to Putin at the height of the pandemic, even as people in his own country struggled to gain access to such resources. (While Trump denied the allegations, the Kremlin — to the extent that its statements have merit — said Trump did, in fact, send Covid tests to Moscow.)

Which came on the heels of Trump refusing to say whether he wants our Ukrainian allies to prevail in the war against Russia.

Which came on the heels of Trump denouncing U.S. efforts to combat Russian misinformation campaigns, going so far as to characterize Russia as a victim.

Which came on the heels of the GOP candidate talking up the possibility of lifting U.S. sanctions against Russia.

Which came weeks after Trump publicly congratulated Russia over a historic prisoner swap.

Which came on the heels of the Republican pointing to Putin for validation to justify his position on Ukraine.

Which came on the heels of the former American president celebrating the fact that Putin was echoing his talking points about the 2024 election and Trump’s multiple criminal indictments.

Which came on the heels of Trump telling a Mar-a-Lago audience how “smart” Putin was for invading a neighboring country.

Which came on the heels of Trump describing Putin’s invasion of Ukraine as “genius” and part of a “wonderful” strategy.

Which came on the heels of years’ worth of Trump kowtowing, genuflecting and repeatedly showing abject weakness toward his Russian ally.

Is it any wonder why Moscow is reportedly going to considerable lengths to “shape the outcome” of the 2024 race “in favor of” Trump?

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Early on in Donald Trump’s presidency, the Republican looked to then-Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell as someone who would simply follow the White House’s demands. When the senator tried to explain how government worked, a “profane shouting match” soon followed.

After Trump’s defeat in 2020, the relationship collapsed further. McConnell had the audacity to accept the results of his own country’s elections and to criticize Trump for failing to do the same, at which point the former president started condemning the GOP leader as a corrupt “hack.”

On Feb. 13, 2021, in the immediate aftermath of Trump's second impeachment trial, McConnell delivered especially pointed remarks, condemning the former president’s “disgraceful dereliction of duty” on Jan. 6. The Senate minority leader added, “There is no question — none — that President Trump is practically and morally responsible for provoking the events of that day. No question about it.”

In the same speech, McConnell called out Trump for his “crescendo of false statements, conspiracy theories, and reckless hyperbole ... orchestrated by an outgoing president who seemed determined to either overturn the voters’ decision or else torch our institutions on the way out.”

In private, the Kentucky Republican reportedly went even further. NBC News reported:

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell has endorsed Donald Trump for president this year. But in a new book, the powerful Kentucky Republican is quoted after the 2020 election disparaging Trump as a ‘despicable human being,’ ‘stupid’ and ‘ill-tempered.’

The same book — “The Price of Power,” from veteran journalist Michael Tackett, the Associated Press’ deputy bureau chief — added that McConnell described the GOP candidate as “narcissistic” and unfit for office. McConnell also reportedly sobbed to his staff on Jan. 6, lamenting the fact that the then-president put their lives in danger.

Oddly enough, when asked for a comment, the Senate’s top GOP member didn’t deny any of this. McConnell instead told the AP in a statement, “Whatever I may have said about President Trump pales in comparison to what JD Vance, Lindsey Graham, and others have said about him, but we are all on the same team now.”

The statement is striking in a few ways. For one thing, McConnell could’ve distanced himself from the provocative quotes in the book, but he didn’t bother. For another, the statement offered no actual praise for his party’s 2024 nominee.

Finally, McConnell’s broader point seemed to be that plenty of Republicans who are supporting Trump’s current candidacy have condemned him in the recent past. That’s true, though it doesn’t change the fact that the GOP senator apparently told others that his party’s nominee for the nation’s highest office is a “despicable human being” and “stupid” — and he’s shown no interest in denouncing those comments.

The larger question is the one McConnell prefers not to talk about: It’s not about whether he and Trump are “on the same team now,” but rather, why.

As regular readers might recall, in the months after the former president left the White House, he waged an unsubtle campaign against the Kentucky Republican, all but begging GOP senators to replace the longtime lawmaker as their leader. He also said McConnell “has a DEATH WISH” for disagreeing with Trump’s legislative strategies, and he went on to tell The New York Times, on the record, that he consider McConnell to be “a piece of s---.”

Trump was just as aggressive in going after the GOP leader’s wife, former cabinet secretary Elaine Chao, with racist taunts and dubious allegations of corruption.

It was against this backdrop that McConnell sat down in April 2022 with reporter Jonathan Swan, who asked whether there were any “moral red lines” that would lead the senator to withhold his support from a Trump-led ticket.

“As a Republican leader of the Senate, it should not be a front-page headline that I will support the Republican nominee for president,” McConnell replied, adding, “I think I have an obligation to support the nominee of my party, and I will.”

When Swan pressed on, asking if there’s anything Trump could possibly do that would be a bridge too far, McConnell appeared visibly frustrated. “I don’t get to pick the Republican nominee for president,” he replied. “They’re elected by the Republican voters.”

In other words, asked about his “moral red lines,” the Kentuckian conceded that such lines effectively do not exist, at least insofar as electoral politics is concerned.

A year later, after Trump targeted McConnell’s wife again, the Senate minority leader again said he’d support his party’s nominee, “no matter who that may be.”

Now, McConnell is “on the same team” as a man he apparently considers “despicable” — not because he’s changed his mind, and not because Trump has improved, but because the senator is convinced that the only affiliation that truly matters is party.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Adding to the growing list of scheduled appearances Trump has canceled at the last minute, Trump on Tuesday flaked on an “interactive town hall” titled “Make America Healthy Again.”

The event, which had been rescheduled once already, was billed as an “expert-driven discussion” featuring Trump, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., and Tulsi Gabbard, among others. The website now reads, “this event has been cancelled for now due to changes in President Trump’s schedule.”

In recent weeks, Trump has pulled out of interviews with mainstream media outlets including “60 Minutes,” CNBC and NBC News. Last week, the National Rifle Association said it was canceling an event with Trump because of “campaign scheduling changes.”

After Trump also reportedly backed out of an interview with The Shade Room last week, one of Trump’s handlers reportedly told producers he was “exhausted and refusing [some] interviews.”

Harris pounced on the report.“He is ducking debates and canceling interviews,” the vice president remarked during a rally in Grand Rapids, Mich. “Well, if you are exhausted on the campaign trail, it raises real questions about whether you are fit for the toughest job in the world.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

LAS VEGAS — When Jesse Law, chair of the Clark County Republican Party, took the microphone to address a room full of evangelical Christian volunteers before they hit the doors on a sizzling hot Saturday morning in late September, he made sure to cast the Republican message in faith-based terms.

He encouraged the volunteers, who are affiliated with the American Christian Caucus, to talk to voters about “really great solutions that are founded in the Bible and in Christianity.”

Advertisement

What solutions? Mainly, exempting workers’ tips from federal taxes.

“When I bring up Trump or Harris, everyone is automatically already forming opinions, some of them divined from media,” Law said. “If you just bring up tax on tips to any of the service workers, they know exactly what that is, and that value is what resonates and brings us together.”

In fact, the idea of “no tax on tips” has less to do with the Bible and more to do with former President Donald Trump’s attempts to bring Nevada into the Republican column for the first time since 2004. Trump shook up the race for the Battle Born State in June when he announced the proposal at a rally in Las Vegas, claiming he got the idea after speaking with a server at a Las Vegas hotel.

Jesse Law, chair of the Clark County Republican Party, embraces Krissian Marquez at Fervent Calvary Chapel Church on Saturday, Sept. 28, in Las Vegas. Ronda Churchill

Although the proposal is national in scope, the idea has now become one of the issues defining the contest in Nevada, a swing state where over one in four private-sector workers are in the tip-fueled hospitality industry. Polls have shown Harris and Trump essentially tied in the state.

Advertisement

It’s been part of a string of bumper-sticker proposals to end specific types of taxes, including those on Social Security and on overtime, that Trump has trotted out to curry favor with voters — never mind the price tag, the difficulties with implementation, or the fact that Trump has a history of promising popular things he subsequently fails to follow through on.

“You can’t just say ‘no taxes on tips,’ which is Trump’s way to try to buy votes.” - Bethany Khan, the Culinary Union

Trump’s credibility on matters related to tips is especially dubious. As president, Trump’s Department of Labor proposed allowing employers to share tipped employees’ tips with non-tipped employees, prompting Congress to pass legislation explicitly forbidding employers from taking workers’ tips.

Still, Democrats needed to take Trump’s gambit seriously, not least because the Culinary Union Local 226, which represents 60,000 hospitality workers in Las Vegas and Reno, supported the idea.

Vice President Kamala Harris came out in favor of the proposal at her first Nevada rally in August. Her campaign — and the Culinary Union — see her more detailed position, including a commitment to preventing high-earning professionals and executives from using it to evade federal income taxes, as more credible, effective and comprehensive.

Advertisement

“Relief is definitely needed for tip earners, but Nevada workers are smart enough to know the difference between real solutions and wild campaign promises from a convicted felon,” Ted Papageorge, secretary-treasurer of the Culinary Union, which has endorsed Harris, said at the time.

Trump has not exactly done anything to assuage these critics’ concerns. Indeed, he has not actually rolled out anything that could be considered a “plan” to exempt tips from federal taxes. It’s not clear, for example, whether he would exempt them from all federal taxes, which would include the payroll taxes that fund workers’ Social Security and Medicare benefits.

“You can’t just say ‘no taxes on tips,’ which is Trump’s way to try to buy votes,” Bethany Khan, a spokesperson for the Culinary Union, told HuffPost.

Donald Trump talks to voters after a Latino roundtable on Oct. 12 in North Las Vegas, Nevada. Nevada Latino voters are heavily represented in fields where tips are common. Ethan Miller/Getty Images

The Harris campaign also cites concerns by liberal policy experts about the ability of high earners to try to arrange to be compensated through some kind of voluntary “tipping”-style arrangement and thus evade taxation.

Advertisement

Harris, by contrast, is interested in limiting the tax exemption to service and hospitality workers making $75,000 a year or less.

“Trump’s taxes on tips policy is nothing more than another tax loophole to make his wealthy friends richer,” Amahree Archie, the Harris campaign’s Nevada press secretary said in a statement. “The choice couldn’t be clearer this election.”

To avoid encouraging employers to pay lower pre-tip wages, Harris would also tie passage of the tax exemption to the elimination of the subminimum wage for tipped workers. Currently just seven states require employers to pay tipped workers the same minimum wage as non-tipped workers. And 15 states require only the federal minimum of $2.13 an hour for tipped workers.

Harris plans to eliminate the subminimum wage for workers with disabilities as well.

“Vice President Harris’ New Way Forward will not only eliminate taxes on tips, but go further by raising the minimum wage and ending the sub-minimum wages for tipped workers and people with disabilities,” Archie said.

Rep. Steven Horsford, a Nevada Democrat who previously ran the Culinary Union’s Culinary Academy, announced in August he would be introducing the TIPS Act as a legislative model for Harris’ version of the no tax on tips idea. The bill, which does not yet have specific legislative language, would eliminate the subminimum wage for tipped workers and end taxes on tips, while ensuring high earners in traditionally untipped fields don’t exploit the new tax exemption.

Advertisement

For her part, Harris has not spelled out exactly how much she would raise the federal minimum wage for non-tipped workers, which is currently $7.25.

Regardless, enacting a minimum wage hike, let alone eliminating the subminimum wages that are fiercely defended by restaurant lobbying groups, is a long shot. When President Joe Biden tried to include the $15 minimum wage in his American Rescue Plan Act in 2021, the Senate parliamentarian said it could not be in a budget reconciliation bill, and was thus vulnerable to a filibuster. Since Democrats lacked the votes to break a filibuster, the proposal got shelved.

Perhaps because of the unlikelihood that such a bill would become law, or perhaps because it would draw attention to an issue where Trump has a clear advantage, Harris has not made “no tax on tips” a major theme of her campaigning in Nevada. She did not mention the proposal during a late September rally in Las Vegas, or a televised, Las Vegas-based town hall with Latino voters last week.

The Harris campaign has mentioned the “no tax on tips” proposal in at least a handful of digital ads, according to Meta’s digital ad archive, but it has not been a major focus of their paid communications. Trump has mentioned the proposal more frequently in advertising, and regularly highlights the proposal on billboards in swing states.

“He’s sincere about it. People in town know it.” - Jesse Law, chair, Clark County Republican Party

Advertisement

For their part, Republicans see an opportunity to undermine Democrats’ brand as a champion for Nevada workers, including the state’s Latino residents, among whom Harris is struggling to get the level of support Biden received in 2020.

The issue of “no tax on tips” resonates strongly with the state’s Latino voters, according to a Noble Predictive Insights poll conducted in September. About two-thirds of the poll’s Latino respondents said the two candidates’ “no tax on tips” proposals made them more likely to vote, compared with 38% of non-Hispanic, white Nevada voters. In the poll, 50% of Latino voters said they trust Trump to deal with the issue, compared with 38% who trust Harris.

“He’s sincere about it. People in town know it,” Law told HuffPost.

Democrats are hoping to offset some of Trump’s advantage on the issue by undercutting the only concrete proposal put forward by a Republican, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s No Tax on Tips Act.

The bill, which Cruz introduced in June, specified that tips would be exempt from federal income taxes — not other federal levies. It also does not include any earnings restrictions or other measures to crack down on potential abuse of the bill to evade taxes.

A July analysis by the Center for American Progress (CAP), a think tank aligned with the Democratic Party, pointed out Cruz’s bill would do far less for people on the lower end of the earnings spectrum than restoring the American Rescue Plan Act’s temporary increases to the Child Tax Credit and Earned Income Tax Credit, since low-income people are already exempt from federal income taxes.

Advertisement

Kamala Harris, right, greets Nevada Reps. Susie Lee, left, and Steven Horsford, center. Horsford has introduced the TIPS Act, exempting tips from federal income taxes but also barring it from becoming a loophole for rich people. RONDA CHURCHILL/Getty Images

And due to the bill’s absence of explicit “guardrails” for preventing exploitation by high earners, CAP depicted a scenario where a married couple with $1 million in earnings would save $180,000 by finding a way to designate half of their earnings as tips.

Darin Miller, a spokesperson for Cruz, rebutted the think tank’s analysis on X at the time, noting that the Internal Revenue Service already forbids people from designating involuntary compensation as “tip” income.

“Reclassifying non-tip income as tips has a name: tax fraud,” Miller wrote.

Not so fast, says Brendan Duke, CAP’s senior director for economic policy and author of the July analysis panning Cruz’s plan.

Duke sketched out some ways in which high earners could still find a way to earn their keep through a kind of upscale tipping system. For example, corporate lawyers might charge clients a lower hourly fee while making clear they expect a large tip at the end of a project. If a tip is too small, a client might not be able to retain that lawyer’s services going forward, but the arrangement would still be voluntary.

Advertisement

“No tax on tips creates a very, very large benefit to receiving income through tips.” - Brendan Duke, Center for American Progress

“This gets pretty complicated pretty fast,” Duke told HuffPost. “No tax on tips creates a very, very large benefit to receiving income through tips.”

An analysis by experts at New York University’s nonpartisan Tax Law Center that came out Thursday reaches a similar conclusion, noting how some hedge fund managers and other investment professionals have found a way to escape the top marginal income tax rate of 37% in favor of the top long-term capital gains rate of 20%.

“The tax savings that such professionals could achieve by recharacterizing their income as ‘tip’ is even more enticing as it would reduce the tax rate on that income to zero,” write the Tax Law Center’s Mike Kaercher and Chye-Ching Huang.

One difficulty for Democrats and policy experts trying to steer the next president closer to a Harris/Horsford-style proposal is that Cruz’s bill almost immediately picked up the support of Nevada Sens. Catherine Cortez Masto and Jacky Rosen, both of whom are Democrats. The Culinary Union praised Cortez Masto and Rosen, at the time, for “joining bipartisan legislation to provide relief to hospitality workers in Nevada.”

Advertisement

Now the union is more keen to praise Horsford’s proposal, which came out after Cruz’s bill.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

A four-part appendix detailing more about former President Donald Trump’s alleged criminal attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election hit the public record on Friday.

U.S. District Judge Tanya Chutkan approved the public release on the federal criminal docket in Washington, D.C., late Thursday, following weeks of Trump requesting to keep the appendix out of the public eye.

Advertisement

Trump told the judge on Oct. 10 he needed more time to weigh his “litigation options” if she decided to admit the source materials publicly, arguing they could be damaging to jurors and the integrity of the case. Chutkan agreed to give him one week to respond and make his arguments at blocking the release. He filed a last-ditch motion early Thursday asking for more time, but was denied.

The appendix is split into four parts with sensitive information redacted. The four volumes total more than 1,800 pages.

Volume I is mostly transcripts of interviews with witnesses who testified before the House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol.

There is a new detail in this first volume that stands out, however: testimony before the Jan. 6 committee from a White House valet to Trump.

Advertisement

The valet told the committee that on Jan. 6, when Trump was preparing to watch playback of his speech as violence erupted, Trump asked him if his “speech was cut off.” The valet told the committee that he tried to explain to Trump that it had been.

The record shows the valet appears to be reviewing photos with investigative counsel for the Jan. 6 committee when he is testifying about Trump’s reaction.

“And that’s pretty much the face I got the whole time, and it was kind of like he told me, Really? And I was like, yes sir,” the valet said.

This transcript with the valet has been released before — by House Republicans. But Smith’s version unmasks what they redacted.

The version published in March by Rep. Barry Loudermilk (R-Ga.), the chair of the House Administration Subcommittee on Oversight, redacted the section where the valet tells investigators that after Trump said “let’s go see” when he was told that his speech was cut off, the valet took off Trump’s outer coat, got a television ready for him and handed him a remote.

Advertisement

“And he starts watching it. And I stepped out to get him a Diet Coke, come back in, and that’s pretty much it for me as he’s watching it and like, seeing it for himself,” the valet testified, according to Smith’s version.

The Republican version of the transcript also redacted when congressional investigators next asked the valet: “So, you set up the TV. Did you set it up for him to watch his speech or live coverage of what was happening at the Capitol?”

“Typically, that’s — a lot of times he’s in that back dining room a lot,” the valet said.

The contents of the transcript with the valet cut off here in Smith’s appendix once investigators asked the valet if he knew, in fact, whether Trump was watching the events at the Capitol.

Volume I also contains a previously public transcript in which Jan. 6 committee investigators ask a witness about whether Trump’s Jan. 6 speech draft was something his staffers categorized as “political” or “official.”

This is a key distinction for the special counsel’s team because it argues that Trump’s activities when he was in a campaign capacity are not official and therefore are prosecutable.

Advertisement

Notably, the witness first told committee investigators they didn’t recollect whether anybody told them that day if Trump’s speech at the Ellipse was a political one.

But “afterward,” the witness said, they knew that transcriptions of Trump’s speech went out via text and it was “styled ‘internal transcript.’”

“And my recollection is internal transcripts were political speeches,” the witness said.

Another transcript in the first volume features testimony from Greg Jacob, former Vice President Mike Pence’s legal counsel. The transcript in the Smith appendix redacts Jacob’s name, but a side-by-side comparison by HuffPost of the Jan. 6 committee transcript and the one Chutkan published Friday, confirms it is him.

Here the material Smith attaches to his immunity arguments zeroes in on testimony in which Jacob told the Jan. 6 committee about attempts by Trump darling and “coup memo” author John Eastman to convince Pence and Pence’s staff that a vice president had the constitutional authority to count slates and object to them.

This meant, according to Eastman, that anything in the existing legislation that governed the count, like the Electoral Count Act, was unconstitutional.

Advertisement

“But if we were to do what [Eastman] suggested, it would mean that none of those debates happened in Congress. None of those Senators would get to make their objections. We would be asserting we have the unilateral authority to do all of that,” Jacob testified.

Jacob expressed that Eastman appeared to understand the scheme wouldn’t work for Pence and it would be rejected if advanced.

“John, isn’t this just a terrible idea?” Jacob asked Eastman.

Eastman “didn’t quite get to saying yes,” Jacob said, but when he told Eastman that, if they took the fight all the way to the Supreme Court, they would lose 9-0, Eastman balked saying it would be 7-2 and he might have Justice Clarence Thomas on his side.

The men went over a few of Thomas’ opinions and Eastman backed off a bit, admitting he would lose 9-0.

Eastman told Jacob “they” would be “really disappointed.”

“They’re going to be really disappointed that I wasn’t able to persuade you,” Eastman allegedly told Jacob.

Advertisement

Eastman didn’t clarify who “they” referred to before he left the meeting with Jacob.

Volume II is heavily redacted and primarily features tweets from Trump in which he said there had been pervasive voter fraud in battleground states and called on state and election officials to address it. In tweets from November 2020, including on and around Election Day, Trump calls on the Supreme Court to decide the outcome or alleges that fraud in those battleground states is an “unsolvable problem.”

The records show how officials including Philadelphia City Commissioner Al Schmidt were forced to directly rebut Trump’s bunk claims online but often with demonstrably less effect on social media, given Trump’s reach on Twitter.

The tweets and retweets relate, in part, to Smith’s allegation that Trump was exacting a pressure campaign on election officials predicated on information he knew to be false and despite being told numerous times after Election Day that the election had been the most secure in history. Chris Krebs, former director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, made that announcement on Nov. 13. Former Attorney General William Barr would declare publicly on Dec. 1 that there was no evidence of voter fraud. None of that deterred Trump from pursuing his conspiracy theories, according to prosecutors.

This volume also shows tweets in which Trump calls on people to come to Washington on Jan. 6, 2021, and not just the first time, Dec. 19, 2020, when he blasted out the invite to his “wild” rally.

Smith’s appendix shows Chutkan that Trump sent out the call multiple times in December, including on Dec. 30, when he wrote, “JANUARY SIXTH, SEE YOU IN DC!”

Advertisement

The appendix also shows that Dec. 30 post was retweeted by Trump’s official “Team Trump” campaign account. So were several others.

Volume III has sections from Pence’s book, “So Help Me God.” Prosecutors highlighted certain passages in which Pence’s describes trying to console a despondent Trump over his defeat and Pence’s own awareness at the time that if there had been any voter fraud, it wasn’t enough to cost Republicans the 2020 election.

Other sections feature Pence’s recollection of Trump’s repeated calls to him on the eve of the U.S. Capitol attack.

“You gotta be tough tomorrow,” Pence recalled Trump telling him.

There are transcripts from court hearings in the third appendix, including a portion of one that took place in Arizona’s Maricopa County, where Trump and his cohorts peddled a fake elector scheme. Other transcripts come straight from political speeches Trump gave, including one on Jan. 4, 2021, when he endorsed Republican Sens. Kelly Loeffler and David Perdue before a Georgia runoff election. Trump spent much of that rally talking about his own reelection campaign and claiming the presidential vote had been rigged.

“And I hope Mike Pence comes through for us, I have to tell you,” Trump said in a stump speech in Georgia, adding that he liked Pence but that if he didn’t “come through for us,” he wouldn’t “like him quite as much.”

Advertisement

Trump would echo those remarks 48 hours later at his speech on the Ellipse.

Volume III also includes copies of electoral vote certificates that so-called Trump electors tried to pass off in Pennsylvania, Nevada, Michigan, Arizona and Georgia.

Other records released Friday show a budget and trip plan for Jan. 4 to Jan. 6, in which close to $3 million was allotted for events with right-wing groups including Turning Point Action, Tea Party Express and Save the U.S. Senate.

Volume IV contains information that is mostly already in the public record and was obtained through the House Jan. 6 committee. Much of this 384-page document is redacted and it doesn’t offer much new to pore over. There are letters and emails already on the record about the strategy to advance fake electors as well as Pence’s letter issued on Jan. 6, 2021, stating that he did not have unilateral authority to determine which electoral slates should be counted.

It also includes a transcript of a town hall from May 2023 in which Trump defended his remarks made at the rally on the Ellipse on Jan. 6, 2021, and denied telling people to march to the Capitol that day.

The next big deadline Trump must meet in the election subversion case arrives Nov. 7, when he must reply to the 165-page immunity brief special counsel Jack Smith filed on Oct. 2. When he does, it is expected that Trump’s lawyers will emphasize that Trump genuinely believed there was widespread voter fraud and that he acted with the interest of the nation first to reverse his defeat.

Advertisement

Trump’s lawyers are also expected to push back on key distinctions Smith made around Trump as candidate for a new term in office versus Trump as commander-in-chief.

Smith’s immunity brief offered insight into Trump’s alleged conduct and frame of mind before and on Jan. 6, 2021, and included information on alleged efforts to advance fake electors in swing states that he lost to Joe Biden and pressure former Vice President Mike Pence to overturn the results.

It pored over tweets, emails and testimony from dozens of Trump White House officials, insiders or allies to establish the contours of the sweeping conspiracy that culminated into a violent, armed and deadly attack on the U.S. Capitol. Importantly, the brief also addressed which of Trump’s acts were and were not “official,” according to Smith, under the Supreme Court’s recent presidential immunity decision.

The Supreme Court’s ruling granted presidents absolute immunity for their core acts and “presumptive” immunity for all other official acts. But actions outside of core acts are not given this protection.

It will be up to Chutkan to decide whether Smith’s interpretations and attempts to rebut the “presumptive” immunity standards can survive the standards the nation’s highest court has now set.

Advertisement
Roundup: Harris, Trump campaigns hit overdrive

Enlarge this image toggle caption Susan Walsh/AP Susan Walsh/AP

As Election Day nears, the campaigns of both Kamala Harris & Donald Trump kicked into high gear. Both are holding rallies & making media appearances to make their cases to a small group of still undecided or persuadable voters.



This episode: senior White House correspondent Tamara Keith, and White House correspondents Deepa Shivaram & Franco Ordoñez.

The podcast is produced by Jeongyoon Han, Casey Morell and Kelli Wessinger. Our editor is Eric McDaniel. Our executive producer is Muthoni Muturi.



Listen to every episode of the NPR Politics Podcast sponsor-free, unlock access to bonus episodes with more from the NPR Politics team, and support public media when you sign up for The NPR Politics Podcast+ at plus.npr.org/politics.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
It wasn’t long ago that Democrats embraced an unequivocally pro-immigrant stance.

The party once defined its immigration platform in opposition to the policies of former President Donald Trump’s first term: separating families detained at the border, a travel ban on Muslim-majority countries, and efforts to gut the asylum system among them. In 2020, President Joe Biden ran on a message of undoing the cruelties of his predecessor, and in his first week in office, he signed a flurry of executive actions doing just that.

Much has changed in the four years since. In the final weeks of the 2024 campaign, the rhetoric coming from Kamala Harris and most Democrats is decidedly different. There’s a greater focus on border security and less emphasis on immigrants’ rights and contributions to the country.

This pivot didn’t come from nowhere. Border crossings reached record highs at the end of 2023, fueling a Republican narrative of chaos that Americans appear to have embraced. Though crossings have come down significantly throughout 2024, more Americans still want to see immigration levels decrease than at any point since the early 2000s, just after the 9/11 terror attacks. Polls show most voters support stricter border security measures; a growing share wants mass deportations.

This is the political reality Democrats have had to confront ahead of the presidential election: Broadly, Americans hold anti-immigration views. It doesn’t really matter that Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic nominee, was known as a champion for immigrant rights in the Senate and during her 2020 presidential bid. In a race against Trump, who has upped the ante on his dehumanizing rhetoric about immigrants in the final stretch of the campaign, she can’t afford to look weak on the border if she wants to win. That’s especially true given immigration is an issue that has only become more salient among the independent voters she’s courting in key states.

“Before you can fix a policy, first you must get elected,” said Chuck Rocha, a Democratic strategist and former senior adviser on Sen. Bernie Sanders’s 2020 presidential campaign who designed Sanders’s Latino vote outreach strategy. “[Republicans] have bullied Democrats for years on this issue, and I think it smart for the Harris campaign to not back down and take them on.”

Assuming Harris wins, what’s next for Democrats and liberals on immigration? The progressive left that was once so vocally pro-immigration has largely supported Harris despite her sprint to the center. That’s because progressives know full well that a Trump administration would be worse. But if Trump and his xenophobic agenda are defeated, that could make room for a leftist offensive on immigration. What would that look like, and will we see it during a Harris administration?

How a new politics of immigration emerged

Democrats’ 2020 platform didn’t even mention border security. Instead, it focused on expanding legal immigration pathways and rolling back the US’s immigration detention regime. Four years after former President Barack Obama was dubbed the “deporter in chief,” it seemed as though Trump had pushed Democrats to embrace a newfound moral case for increasing immigration.

But amid a challenging new reality on the border and resulting political pressure, Biden advanced immigration policies that his Republican predecessor devised himself or would have at least approved of:

He kept Trump’s Title 42 policy in place for more than two years, allowing him to turn away swaths of immigrants at the border under the guise of protecting public health during the Covid-19 pandemic, despite the fact that public health experts saw no evidence that it was an effective means of curbing the virus.

He instituted his version of Trump’s asylum transit ban . That rule allows immigration enforcement officials to turn away migrants for a number of reasons: if they do not have valid travel and identification documents, if they’ve traveled through another country without applying for asylum, if they don’t show up at a port of entry at an appointed time, and more.

He issued a proclamation barring asylum seekers who cross the border without permission from applying for protections in the US when migrant crossings exceed a daily average of 2,500 in a week.

Harris played a role in executing this strategy, and immigration was part of her portfolio as vice president from the early months of Biden’s presidency. She was tasked with addressing the root causes of migration in a diplomatic role that primarily involved directing private-sector investment to Central America.

During a visit to Guatemala in June 2021, she delivered a controversial message to migrants: “Don’t come” to the US. When border crossings later spiked, she came under fire from Republicans as Biden’s failed “border czar,” a frame that the Biden administration sought to rebut.

US Vice President Kamala Harris speaks during a press conference with Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei. AFP via Getty Images

In February, Biden tried to make concrete progress on immigration by endorsing a bipartisan bill that included border security measures that Democrats wouldn’t have dreamed of supporting a few years prior, including a new authority to quickly expel migrants arriving on the southern border at times of high demand. In exchange, Democrats would have gotten something they wanted: closing gaps in the legal immigration system that have left everyone from the children of high-skilled foreign workers to Afghan refugees in limbo.

At first, Republicans coalesced around the bill and it seemed as though it would pass — that is, until Trump began to lobby against it, reportedly stating he wanted to keep the border a live issue in the presidential election.

To be sure, Biden’s approach hasn’t been entirely focused on border security. It’s worth noting that Biden has also advanced one of the biggest efforts in over a decade to legalize undocumented immigrants. Under the new program, which is now on hold due to a legal challenge, approximately 500,000 spouses of US citizens and 50,000 of their stepchildren could be eligible to apply for permanent residence and get a green card without having to leave the US.

But such moves are the exception. The Biden era has generally seen Democrats move closer to Trump on immigration rather than further away. As the Democratic nominee, Harris has had to navigate that new normal.

What would a Harris presidency mean for the politics of immigration?

Democrats outlined their immigration platform before Biden decided not to seek reelection, but Harris still needs to detail how she would approach the issue.

She has indicated in public appearances that her strategy will be two-pronged, focused on securing the border and developing earned pathways to citizenship, including for Dreamers in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, which provides legal protections to migrants who came to the US without authorization as children.

She has repeatedly argued that Trump is simultaneously not tough enough and not compassionate enough on immigration, whereas she seems intent on presenting herself as striking that balance.

That’s been clear in her rhetoric, but what exactly that balance looks like in practice promises to be the subject of an intra-movement struggle, one that pits pro-immigrant activists against the party’s relative border hawks.

Harris’s rhetoric during the campaign has suggested a tougher-on-immigration approach.

For instance, when speaking at her only debate with Trump about the border bill that Democrats tried to pass in February, she cast the failed bill — and Trump’s advocacy against it — as evidence that the former president isn’t serious about finding a way to improve the situation at the US-Mexico border: “He preferred to run on a problem instead of fixing a problem,” Harris said.

During a Univision town hall earlier this month, Harris again criticized Trump for tanking the bill. However, this time, it was in response to a question from a voter whose mother died before she could become a US citizen. Harris argued that the bill could have created “a comprehensive earned pathway to citizenship for hard-working people” like the voter’s mother.

That’s not an entirely accurate portrayal of the bill. It would have expanded existing pathways to citizenship with the addition of 250,000 family- and employment-based visas and opened up a path to permanent status for Afghans who came to the US after American forces withdrew from Afghanistan, but it was hardly comprehensive in its approach.

Still, the interaction showed Harris trying to soften her tone, if not the border policies she supports.

“Depending on what venue she’s talking in, she frames the immigration issue a bit differently,” said Douglas Rivlin, a spokesperson for the immigrant advocacy group America’s Voice. “On Univision, her humanity came through in a way.”

Some progressives, however, see reason to believe that Harris would be more pro-immigrant as a president than she has been as a campaigner.

Rocha noted that the Harris campaign has hired immigrant activists, including Alida Garcia, who led immigration advocacy at the immigration and criminal justice reform advocacy group FWD.us, and Julie Chávez Rodriguez, the granddaughter of Latino civil rights activist and labor leader César Chávez. And that could suggest that her campaign is thinking about how to advance a pro-immigrant agenda within the current political environment.

Progressives also seem to believe that while they may not endorse all of Harris’s immigration policies, they can still find ways to work together, as they used to when she was a senator.

Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-WA), chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, recounted that Harris co-sponsored the first bill she ever introduced, a response to Trump’s travel ban. It sought to ensure that people had access to legal counsel in detention when they first arrived in the US.

“She cares about the dignity and humanity of people who come to this country,” Jayapal told Vox. “While I have disagreed with some of the immigration positions she has taken, I know that she will be a partner with us on this issue, rather than use immigrants as a political football the way Republicans and Donald Trump have.”

Jayapal’s comments are a reminder of why the pro-immigrant left has given Harris scope to operate against Trump, whose rhetoric about immigrants, from his debunked comments about Haitians eating pets to his claims that immigrants are “poisoning the blood” of America, has recently reached a new low. But the question is whether — and for how long — progressives’ goodwill toward Harris will last if Trump is defeated.

Concretely, immigration battles under a Harris administration would likely play out on some of the same issues where the left criticized Biden, including his restrictions on asylum seekers at the border and the February border bill that Harris has held up as a model for Democrats going forward. Activists still want many of the same reforms Harris supported in 2020, such as swapping out deterrence-based policies for policies expanding safe pathways to come to the US and improving access to asylum.

However, the impulses that drive support for Trump’s immigration policies aren’t likely to just fade away, even if the man himself recedes from public life. So, a President Harris would likely still face demand from the American public to prioritize border security. That may not leave much room for her to adopt the mantle of the left’s priorities on immigration.

Advocates seem to acknowledge that reality as well as the practical challenges of passing immigration reform in a divided Congress or issuing executive actions on immigration that could be challenged in court.

“The American people are pretty clear about what they want to have happen on immigration. They want the balanced approach that Harris and the Democrats are for,” Rivlin said.

Advocates are holding out hope that Harris can use her bully pulpit to change the tone of the conversation about immigration in America, as she started to do at the Univision town hall. In Rivlin’s view, “That’s one of the most important things that needs to happen on immigration.”
is a senior correspondent at Vox. She writes features on a wide range of subjects, including traffic safety, gun violence, and the legal system. Prior to Vox, she worked as a writer for New York magazine, GQ, ESPN the Magazine, and other publications.

Eight years ago, when Hillary Clinton seemed poised to be elected the first female president of the United States, it sometimes seemed as though the candidate and the media couldn’t talk about it enough.

“I think it would be a great moment for our country,” Clinton told 60 Minutes about the possibility of becoming the first woman in the Oval Office. “Every little boy and every little girl should be given the chance to go as far as his or her hard work and talent might take them.”

On the trail, she underscored the possibility that she would end America’s long tradition of only electing men for president. “Clearly, I’m not asking people to vote for me simply because I’m a woman. I’m asking people to vote for me on the merits,” Clinton said at one event in 2015. “I think one of the merits is I am a woman, and I can bring those views and perspectives to the White House.”

Clinton leaned into the symbolism and meaning of her history-making run. She wore white — the color of the suffragist movement, which won the women’s right to vote in 1920 — as she accepted the Democratic nomination. She made a point of centering policy questions that had long been sidelined as women’s issues. And she framed her candidacy as the culmination of a generational project of women fighting for their political rights.

This year, the United States is once again on the verge of potentially making history with a woman at the top of the ticket, facing off against the same candidate from 2016. The observation that “history doesn’t repeat itself, but it often rhymes” feels prescient because the tidy comparisons end there.

This time, what was once a major election theme — whether America was ready to elect a woman as president, and what it would mean if it did — is mostly absent from the national conversation.

The changes have much to do with the different candidates and a very different set of circumstances this year. They also point to just how much the culture of politics in the US has transformed since 2016.

Harris’s campaign is approaching identity differently than Clinton’s did

As the nominee, Harris has made a point of sidestepping questions about her identity. When right-wing commentators launched misogynistic attacks on social media, amplified by former President Donald Trump, the campaign didn’t bother to respond. When Trump suggested, absurdly, to a gathering of the National Association of Black Journalists, that Harris had been hiding her identity as a Black woman and only recently “happened to turn Black,” Harris refused to take the bait.

“Same old tired playbook. Next question, please,” Harris laughed, when CNN’s Dana Bash asked her about Trump’s remarks in an interview.

Later in the interview, after Bash noted that Harris hadn’t mentioned her race or gender in her DNC acceptance speech, she asked about a viral photograph of Harris’s grandniece watching her accept the nomination from the audience. Harris again declined to talk about the potentially historic nature of her candidacy.

“I am running because I believe that I am the best person to do this job at this moment for all Americans, regardless of race and gender,” Harris said.

It’s a very different answer from the one Hillary Clinton gave 60 Minutes eight years ago. It was hard not to notice that, unlike Clinton, Harris wore a dark suit to accept the Democratic Party’s nomination, standing in front of a sea of delegates who wore white instead.

To be sure, Harris is finding ways to highlight the contrast between her and her opponent, such as forcefully advocating for reproductive rights against a candidate responsible for appointing Supreme Court justices who helped overturn Roe v. Wade and proposing to cap child care costs at 7 percent of a family’s income.

Harris has also spoken of being part of a new generation of leadership, which might be a more subtle way of highlighting her gender. “I think generational change is stylistically standing in for the conversation about electing a woman,” says Rebecca Traister, writer for New York magazine (which is part of Vox Media) and the author of multiple books about how women have reshaped contemporary politics. One of Trump’s most successful lines of attack against President Joe Biden was over his age; now he’s facing off against someone younger, non-white, and female — traits that have allowed Harris to make the case that she’s the change candidate, despite being the current vice president.

This campaign is different, but the culture of politics and media has changed dramatically since 2016 too

The decision not to emphasize the possibility that Harris would be the first Black woman president probably isn’t coincidental. Harris is likely running her campaign differently in an attempt to ensure a better outcome than 2016, when Clinton won the popular vote but still lost the election.

After her loss, an argument emerged, popular among the progressive and populist wings of the party, that Clinton and her supporters had overemphasized her gender as a selling point in the race, alienating voters who weren’t moved by the idea of making representational history. They argued that the party as a whole should do less talking about identity issues like race and gender, focusing instead on economic class and uniting people under a common set of Democratic ideals.

“One of the lessons coming out of 2016 is that focusing on identity was not enough to sway swing voters in battleground states,” says Jennifer Lawless, a professor of politics at the University of Virginia who studies the intersection of politics, media, and gender.

The question of whether Clinton talked too much about gender can’t be untangled from other thorny questions about her campaign and external factors like James Comey’s last-minute announcement that the FBI was investigating more of her emails.

But Harris is likely making the right choice in choosing not to emphasize gender. There’s good evidence to suggest that voters don’t want Harris to talk about gender or race, preferring instead that she focus on issues. The fact that Trump’s campaign is trying to drive the gender gap with overt appeals to male voters, says Lawless, means Harris can focus on issues that might matter to women without trying to win them by explicitly invoking identity.

“They’re making gender salient,” Lawless says of Trump and Vance. “Voters only need to look at Harris and realize she doesn’t hold those views. So she gets away from being ‘a woman running as a woman’ and still reaps the benefits.”

The choice to emphasize other messages during Harris’s short campaign is more than just thematic. It also speaks to the precarious place the campaign finds itself in, with only weeks left until Election Day.

This time, Democrats are much more aware of the fact that Harris might not win. The polls show a tighter race this year than they did in 2016, when the conventional wisdom, informed by inaccurate polls, was that Clinton was the favorite to win.

“I don’t think there’s a lot of excitement about talking about it for a bunch of PTSD-related reasons,” Traister says. “The last time it was a real possibility, we set the world on fire instead.” It’s not just that supporters are much more aware of the possibility that Harris might not win. It’s also that they’re more aware of what it will mean if Trump wins again.

Harris’s late entry into the race has also played a role in the conversation surrounding her campaign. In 2016, after Clinton emerged as the early frontrunner, she appeared on the cover of Newsweek, New York, Time, and the New Yorker, and was given frontrunner status and treated with extra scrutiny. Vogue made a first-time presidential endorsement in favor of Clinton and was one of the many magazines and news sites that devoted thousands of words to the question of whether she’d made history. (Full disclosure: I wrote one of those stories for Vox in 2016, but thankfully we waited to see if she won before running it.)

Clinton was also covered by a resurgent women’s media that invested in campaign coverage and championed causes like reproductive rights.

But women’s publications that had time to plan coverage for Clinton’s historic run were caught off guard, just like everyone else, by Harris’s late entry into the race, and the constellation of media outlets that reach voters have shifted. In 2016, Clinton wrote a piece for the Toast, a niche but much-loved feminist website, on its last day of publication; eight years later, the writers for the feminist blogosphere have largely moved on to more mainstream publications, and women’s publications aren’t as much of a fixture of campaign coverage. Harris did appear on the digital cover of Vogue this cycle, but she garnered more attention for appearing on newer outlets that have large female audiences, including the podcast Call Her Daddy.

Women in major political roles aren’t so rare anymore

Perhaps the biggest reason we don’t hear as much about whether the United States is ready to elect a woman is a simple one: The novelty may have worn off.

“There’s not as much of a question of whether America will elect a woman because they’ve done it all across the country, in all of the states,” says Christina Reynolds, who worked as Clinton’s deputy director of communications in 2016 and now serves as senior vice president for Emily’s List, an organization that works to elect Democratic women.

At this point, Harris isn’t the first woman nominee from a major party. Even if she won, she wouldn’t be the first woman to win the popular vote. If she succeeds in November, her supporters will of course celebrate the historic nature of her victory. But the fact that Harris has made it this far, when many Clinton supporters felt she was the only Democratic woman who had a shot of being elected in their lifetimes, is evidence of how many more women are serving in high-profile political positions post-2016.

“Eight years is not a lot of time in real life,” says Lawless. “But in politics, it’s forever.”

In 2018, a record number of women ran for office and won, sending more women to Congress than ever before. The ranks of highly visible women serving in political office expanded, too: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and The Squad became powerful leaders on the left, Stacey Abrams drew national attention by helping deliver Georgia to the Democrats, and in the 2020 Democratic primary, Harris ran for president alongside Sens. Elizabeth Warren, Amy Klobuchar, and Kirsten Gillibrand (former Rep. Tulsi Gabbard and Marianne Williamson ran, too).

Republican women also came to prominence in the years since 2016: Trump’s former press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, became governor of Arkansas, conspiracy theorist Marjorie Taylor Green is a household name, and Nikki Haley was the last candidate standing in the 2024 Republican primary against Trump.

As more women have run for office, political scientists have found that the gender biases long believed to be a barrier for women getting elected are less pronounced than previously believed. While Clinton was the target of sexism over her political career and other well-known female politicians face misogynistic attacks, those high-profile instances are not as predictive of the experience of women running for other offices as people may expect.

“For a long time, the notion was that underrepresentation is driven by demand-side effects, meaning voters don’t want female politicians because they think they can’t do a good enough job or that politics as a profession is very male-typed, and it runs against traditional gender notions of what women can and can’t do,” says Susanne Schwarz, an assistant professor of political science at Swarthmore College.

In a meta-analysis of 67 survey experiments asking voters to choose a hypothetical candidate, where gender was randomly assigned, Schwarz and a colleague found that women candidates actually performed a bit better than men. The finding echoes Lawless’s previous research showing that voters and the media, with some notable exceptions, generally treat women who run for office the same as men.

Harris entered late in the race, without a long campaign in which she could be tarnished by her opponents. She’s spent the last four years in a supporting role in the White House, visible but somewhat less scrutinized than her recent predecessors, including Joe Biden when he was serving as Barack Obama’s vice president. Those unique circumstances make her an unusual combination: well-known enough to have the obvious qualifications necessary to serve as president, but not well-known enough to have her reputation calcified, for better and for worse, in the minds of voters.

“Harris is much closer to the hypothetical candidate in these surveys” — the ones favored by voters — ”than Clinton was in 2016,” Schwarz says.

After 2016, Clinton’s candidacy and her loss sparked a lot of debate about what having better representation in politics can and can’t accomplish. “We’ve been forced to talk about gender, race, identity politics, and representational deficiencies in ways that had not been pressed in this country in the same way before,” Traister says. “There’s been quite a bit of smart conversations about representation and what it achieves and doesn’t. I think we’re a little smarter about representation and identity politics than we were before.”

Ultimately, Reynolds says, not having to talk about the history that Harris may or may not make in November is an encouraging development. If the candidate, media, and voters are talking about it less, it means that the question is probably less of a concern.

“I’m not saying we should never talk about gender,” Reynolds says. “But I think it’s nothing but positive that we don’t hear the question as much.”

Even if we don’t talk about it as much, other questions about gender, and particularly how it will impact each candidate’s vote totals, remain. Recent polls suggest an extremely close race, with Trump holding a double-digit lead with male voters and Harris holding a similar edge among female voters. Whether or not candidate gender is a major theme of the campaign, the gender divide driving more men to support Trump and more women to support Harris could be the defining factor in the race.

The question of whether the US would ever elect a woman president feels answered. The question of whether it will elect this woman this year? Not so much.
When Kamala Harris launched into the race for president in July, the leaders of the Black sororities and fraternities known as the Divine Nine issued a statement vowing “to meet this critical moment in history with an unprecedented voter registration, education and mobilization coordinated campaign.”

They pledged that their organizations—which include Harris’ sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha—would “activate the thousands of chapters and members in our respective organizations” and that they would work “to ensure strong voter turnout in the communities we serve.”

That kind of enthusiastic boost would be valuable for any candidate. But the statement was missing something conspicuous: Nowhere was there mention of Harris’ name.

When it comes to getting involved in elections, fraternities and sororities are in a bit of a tricky spot. As 501(c)(7) nonprofit organizations, they are banned by the IRS from directly endorsing any political candidate for elective public office. Even as Harris’ sorority, AKA isn’t able to explicitly state that it is excited about the possibility of an AKA occupying the Oval Office.

Instead, AKA is emphasizing its nonpartisan networking, volunteering, and get-out-the-vote efforts. Even though, as individuals, members of the sorority are allowed to openly support Harris, most of the AKAs I talked to wouldn’t share specifics about mobilizing on Harris’ behalf. Instead, they spoke broadly about how they are organizing around issues that align with Harris’ campaign.

In August, the sorority also took the unusual (but not unheard-of or illegal) step of forming a PAC that could contribute directly to Harris’ campaign or spend on her campaign’s behalf. The way that PACs work offers a loophole: Money raised by this kind of fund comes from voluntary contributions from organization members rather than the organization itself. PAC managers make decisions about what to do with the money in the interest of the organization, separately from the organization.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The AKA PAC has raised $913,351.08, according to a Federal Election Commission filing released Tuesday. Neither the sorority nor Kiahna Davis, a regional director at AKA who is listed as the PAC’s treasurer, responded to requests for comment about the PAC.

If the amount of political involvement that’s allowed sounds confusing, well, it can be for sorority sisters and fraternity brothers too. In 2014 AKA, along with Delta Sigma Theta and Sigma Gamma Rho (also historically Black sororities), sparked outrage among members when the organization urged them to be engaged in anti–police violence protests in the wake of Michael Brown’s and Eric Garner’s murders—but not to wear their sorority letters at the protests.

Advertisement

Despite not wanting to—or being allowed to—appear too political, the Divine Nine are, in many ways, political organizations. AKA was created in 1908 by Black women to support and advocate for Black people. AKAs pushed for anti-lynching legislation in the 1920s, were active in the Civil Rights Movement in the ’50s and ’60s, and helped build schools in South Africa following the end of apartheid. Yes, the sorority is primarily a social network. But part of its mission is creating pathways to leadership for Black women, and by simply existing as an organization of Black women dealing with matters affecting Black people, AKAs never “had the luxury to be just a social group,” Deborah Whaley, a professor at the University of Iowa and author of Disciplining Women: Alpha Kappa Alpha, Black Counterpublics, and the Cultural Politics of Black Sororities, told me. “If you look at the critical moments in Black cultural history, they’ve always been involved in a whole host of activist work—some seen on a larger scale, but some not.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Melanie De La Rosa, an AKA who graduated from Spelman College this year, said: “I know I’m in a sorority that is nonpartisan, but it absolutely emphasizes the importance of exercising your right to vote. I’m making sure that not only are you coming with me to the polls, I’m sending you content.” Even if she weren’t officially canvassing, De La Rosa said, “I’m going to make sure that you’re informed on the issues. We’re going to talk about these in our social spaces.”

Advertisement

In the run-up to the presidential election, members have been reminded by leadership that they have to be careful when speaking for the sorority. So they’ve had to get creative and straddle the line between being proud members of AKA and a part of the Harris campaign.

Advertisement

Related From Slate Suddenly, the Electoral College Is Posing a Problem for Trump Read More

“It’s been really interesting to see how they’ve been kind of massaging their way through supporting her without endorsing her as a candidate,” said Whaley. “They’re doing things like they did in the earliest days, like voter registration, trying to encourage people to vote, and thinking about different ways to donate financially.”

Sorority members have also been organizing through other political channels: Keneshia Grant, a political science professor at Howard University, pointed out that although the historic Win With Black Women Zoom, which launched the craze for Zoom fundraisers for Harris in late July, wasn’t officially an AKA or a D9 call, many of the women coordinating it and participating were members of D9 sororities. (Grant herself is a Delta.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The goal of that call had been to raise $1 million in 100 days. Instead, over 40,000 participants raised $1.6 million in under two hours. New York magazine’s Rebecca Traister wrote about this call—and the incredible groundswell of support from Black women, who were organized in advance of Biden’s exit from the race—as critical to Harris’ 2024 campaign: “No one in the party had any real sense of the degree of public support for a Harris presidency until that call with the Black women, whose initial gathering at that crucial moment, when the party could have gone in another direction or fractured into a million pieces, instead surprised everyone with its urgency and force and piles of money.”

Advertisement

In other words, AKA’s support of Harris may not always be coming out of the official organization. But AKA is advancing her case at every possible turn, especially in the final weeks of the campaign. Because Harris is a manifestation not just of AKA’s mission to get Black women into leadership roles—but of the possibility that a sorority member could assume the highest level of public leadership in the country.

“These organizations have been involved in politics—in Black politics, in women’s politics—since their founding,” said Grant. “If this organization did not do something sort of above and beyond to support this member, I think that would beg more questions.”
For months, Donald Trump, aware of the fact that he’s trailing badly among women voters, has taken a variety of steps to address the gender gap. In every instance, the former president has made matters worse, not better.

It was against this backdrop that the Republican agreed to a town hall, hosted by Fox News, and all of the attendees in the audience were women.

A CNN report noted that the network “did not disclose that the female audience it selected for the event was packed with local Republican supporters and the network edited its broadcast to remove some of their vocal advocacy of Trump.”

With the deck stacked in the former president’s favor, the event probably should’ve been a breeze for him. It was not: Despite the favorable conditions, Trump found it necessary to lie repeatedly.

But as my MSNBC colleague Clarissa-Jan Lim explained, one claim stood out as especially striking.

Donald Trump declared himself “the father of IVF” to a crowd of women at a Fox News town hall on Tuesday night, making bombastic, bizarre claims about his support for the procedure as he tries to curry favor with female voters ahead of the election. The Republican presidential nominee made the wildly false declaration while fielding a question from someone in the audience, who asked about his position on in vitro fertilization.

“We really are the party for IVF,” Trump added. “We want fertilization, and it’s all the way, and the Democrats tried to attack us on it, and we’re out there on IVF even more than them. So we’re totally in favor.”

Right off the bat, it’s important to emphasize that since earlier this year, Senate Republicans have rejected four different Democratic efforts to protect and expand IVF access. The idea that the GOP is “out there on IVF even more than” Democrats is obviously preposterous.

What’s more, as part of the same on-air exchange, Trump didn’t just label himself “the father of IVF,” the Republican candidate also elaborated on how he came to understand the issue.

Describing the aftermath of an Alabama Supreme Court ruling issued earlier this year, the former president said, “I got a call from Katie Britt — a young, just a fantastically attractive person from Alabama, she’s a senator — and she called me up, like, ‘Emergency, emergency!’”

Why was it necessary to describe the Alabama Republican as “fantastically attractive”? It wasn’t.

Trump nevertheless added that he then asked Britt to explain IVF to him “very quickly,” and “within about two minutes I understood it.”

In other words, by his own telling, Trump wasn’t especially familiar with this common medical treatment until earlier this year. Now, however, he apparently expects to be seen as “the father of IVF” anyway.

A spokesperson for the GOP nominee said the line was a “joke.” Vice President Kamala Harris wasn’t laughing. In fact, the Democratic presidential nominee told reporters that she found Trump’s boast to be “quite bizarre.”

“He should take responsibility for the fact that one in three women in America lives in a Trump’s-abortion-ban state,” Harris added. “What he should take responsibility for is that couples who are praying and hoping and working towards growing a family have been so disappointed and harmed by the fact that IVF treatments have now been put at risk.”

The vice president went on to say, in reference to her 2024 rival, “Let’s not be distracted by his choice of words. Reality is, his actions have been very harmful to women and families in America.”
In the home stretch of the 2024 presidential election, both candidates are trying to reach as many swing-state voters as possible—and Gwen Walz, wife of vice presidential hopeful Tim Walz, pitched in this week with a series of events in Pennsylvania.

On Monday, the Harris campaign organized a “Commit to Vote” party at a private home in Easton—a working-class town in the notoriously unpredictable Northampton County, whose residents have voted nearly every election cycle for the candidate who ends up winning the state and the White House. Four years ago, President Joe Biden won Northampton County by roughly 1,200 votes—less than 1 percentage point—while Hillary Clinton lost it by about 5,500 votes. The Harris campaign is reportedly spending $315 million in Pennsylvania, and that money is hard at work in Northampton, where massive Harris billboard ads are scattered across highways, plastered on buildings, and stuck on street corners.

When you imagine a typical American family home, you probably picture something like John Williamson and Sue Spaziani’s house, with its front porch and shingled roof. Williamson and Spaziani are both retired teachers who also happen to be lifelong Democrats, and when I got to their house Monday afternoon, about an hour before Gwen Walz was scheduled to arrive, a massive camo-print “Harris–Walz” flag was draped across one side of the porch (a nod to the Democrats’ viral campaign merch).

Advertisement

Spaziani welcomed the handful of reporters who had shown up—mostly from local Pennsylvania outlets—into the couple’s cozy living room, which featured a jumble of mismatched frames on the walls and red woven rugs over the creaky, warm wood floors.

Spaziani and Williamson both wore T-shirts that read “I’m Voting for Gus’ Dad,” a reference to Walz’s 18-year-old son Gus, who went viral this summer after getting visibly emotional during his dad’s speech at the Democratic National Convention.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Guests began to arrive, carrying food with them that they added to the growing buffet table, which was loaded up with cookies, cakes, a fruit-and-veggie tray, a small charcuterie board, and woven baskets of potato chips, Triscuits, and Chex Mix. As the home began to fill up with strangers, the family dog started anxiously doing laps around the foyer.

Advertisement

Those in attendance were retired teachers and friends of the family, mostly white, college-educated Democrats. Some of them were invited because they’re members of Spaziani’s book club—and there was a real book-club energy as Williamson offered guests wine and people milled around the interconnected rooms of the ground floor, grabbing food and making small talk. Out the dining room window, I could see a slew of signs endorsing downballot Democrats in the neighbor’s yard.

About an hour into the party, Harris’ campaign staff said Walz would be arriving any minute and ushered the attendees into the foyer, where the staircase had been turned into a makeshift lectern. Lady Gaga’s “The Edge of Glory” began to play from a small speaker, and Walz arrived, wearing a suffragette-white blazer and a red lip, peering through a pair of glasses perched at the end of her nose. If she hadn’t been the center of attention, Walz, a former public school teacher herself, could easily have blended in with the other guests.

Advertisement

Advertisement

“I know that we have a lot of different people here, but we do have some Easton Democrats, don’t we?” Walz joked as the crowd chuckled on cue. It was obvious that this would be a receptive crowd, a group of voters who needed little convincing to vote blue in November. Yet Walz was here playing hype man and encouraging folks to canvass their friends and family to vote for her husband and Harris in a few short weeks. “I hear Trump is also in the collar counties today, peddling his same old gripes and grievances, and it’s just exhausting, isn’t it?” Walz asked, and the crowd booed loudly.

Advertisement

She pledged that a Harris–Walz ticket would prioritize middle-class families by implementing tax cuts, lowering health care costs, and helping families afford housing. She juxtaposed that with what voters could expect from a future Trump–Vance administration. “We cannot fathom anyone being denied a chance at parenthood. But that’s precisely what Trump will do: put fertility treatments at risk nationwide,” Walz said. “As if overturning Roe wasn’t bad enough.”

Advertisement

At the end of her roughly 15-minute speech, Walz held up a small cellophane bag filled with cookies. “Made in Minnesota! These are my great-grandmother’s recipe for gingersnap cookies,” Walz said. “In the Minnesota governor’s residence, whenever we have a party, I serve them warm at the very end, when they’re going out into the cold Minnesota night.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related From Slate Suddenly, the Electoral College Is Posing a Problem for Trump Read More

Then, Harris’ campaign staff suddenly rushed the journalists in the room outside, announcing that the party had become closed to the press and leaving us standing around awkwardly on the sidewalk. A few minutes passed in confused silence as we watched a teenage boy approach the house, snap a picture of the giant Harris–Walz camo flag, and run off.

Advertisement

Luckily, a few attendees decided to leave the event, and I was able to talk to Melissa Killian, a retired 71-year-old who used to run a pediatric pulmonary function lab and who is a member of Spaziani’s book club. She had a “Harris–Walz” button pinned to the lapel of her baby-blue wool coat. “I loved it,” she said of Walz’s speech, with a big smile on her face. “It was invigorating, so nice to be here.” She told me she had no doubt she was voting for Harris and Walz, since she considers herself a lifelong Democrat. Her grandfather was even a former Democratic congressman. “I can’t believe anyone wants to tell me what to do—tell young women what to do—with their bodies,” she said. “It’s sick.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Her daughter Emily Killian, a 43-year-old public school educator, was there as her plus-one. Emily told me she thought Walz was “lovely” and that women’s rights are a top priority for her because she has a young daughter. “I care deeply about her having freedom to make her own choices and having autonomy over her body,” she said. She recently moved to Pennsylvania from Austin, Texas, and now feels the added pressure of being a swing-state voter. “It’s been kind of intense—it feels really close, closer than I wish it felt,” Emily said. “But I’m doing what I can to make a difference, and I’ll definitely be voting for Kamala on Election Day.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Of course, the crowd of committed Democrats at Spaziani and Williamson’s home was a safe bet for Walz. About a mile out, in downtown Easton, was a different story. I met a 26-year-old server at a local restaurant who said she was born and raised in Pennsylvania. The server, who asked me not to use her name, told me she hadn’t noticed many political ads, seeing only a few commercials on her Hulu streaming account. “Honestly, it feels like nobody is talking about the issues I care about,” she told me, which are U.S. food-quality standards and the economy. (The economy has been a major issue for both campaigns, though getting their message to voters who will make or break this race is clearly still a challenge.) The server said she also wants lawmakers to work on eliminating forever chemicals and banning food additives.

She told me that she had voted for Donald Trump in 2020. This time around, she said, she’d likely make her decision on Election Day, during the drive to the voting booth.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Republicans renewed their nationwide attack on abortion pills in a complaint filed last Friday against the Food and Drug Administration.

The amended complaint, filed by attorneys general from Kansas, Missouri and Idaho, is a follow-up to the FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine case that the Supreme Court ruled on this summer. The state attorneys general, as well as previous plaintiffs, seek to significantly roll back access to mifepristone, one of the two drugs that’s been widely and safely used in medication abortion since the FDA first approved it in 2000.

Advertisement

Although the Supreme Court rejected the previous plaintiffs on standing, the high court remanded the case back to a Texas federal court overseen by one of the most notorious anti-abortion judges in the country. The ruling was a relief for abortion rights advocates at the time, but the decision effectively punted the issue of whether mifepristone access should be left as is or further restricted. The move signaled to the country that the conservative-majority Supreme Court is open to litigating future attacks on abortion pills — and this week’s amended complaint is the future assault many legal experts warned about this summer.

“What the court could have done, if it were not such a politicized court, was reached a decision that also included the fact that mifepristone has been known to be safe and is safer than Tylenol or Viagra and various other things that don’t come under these same kinds of regulatory protocols,” said Michele Goodwin, an expert in reproductive health law and Georgetown University law professor. “But the court didn’t do that.”

The state attorneys general argue that the FDA acted “unlawfully” when the agency removed its in-person requirements to access mifepristone, claiming that the drug is “dangerous” and poses a “high risk” to patients. The suit also seeks to ban mifepristone for minors and only make the pill available until seven weeks of pregnancy instead of 10. All of this is argued with brazen anti-abortion rhetoric and very little scientific evidence to back up the claims that they are “protecting” women’s health. Several of the studies cited in the complaint have actually been retracted for using misleading data and having close ties to anti-abortion groups.

The Republican officials’ main goal in the amended complaint is to ban the shipping of medication abortion by invoking the Comstock Act, a 150-year-old law that criminalizes sending “obscene” materials in the mail, including anything “intended for producing abortion.”

Advertisement

Conservative Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas brought up the Comstock Act several times during oral arguments in FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine. Their insistence signaled, at the very least, that they’re willing to engage with the argument and, at most, indicates that they agree Comstock should be enforced. Their questions at the time foreshadowed that they may side with future plaintiffs who make this argument with better standing.

The amended complaint is similar to the original lawsuit in many ways, including that there are no plaintiffs who were directly harmed by mifepristone (a key component to filing a lawsuit), which got the original case rejected for lack of standing. But the power of three state attorneys general making this argument — rather than the private citizens who originally filed the suit in FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine — could make a difference.

“Here you have state attorneys general who are articulating that they have a responsibility to protect the health and safety of people who live in their states,” Goodwin said, referencing officials’ claim that mifepristone is dangerous. “That may be an argument that’s palatable to this court, at least enough to recognize that perhaps they have standing.”

The other difference is timing. The country is less than three weeks away from a consequential election that could change the already-dire landscape of abortion access. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has allied with some of the most extreme anti-abortion advocates who outlined a policy plan in Project 2025 that conjures images of “The Handmaid’s Tale.” A Trump Justice Department could stop defending the FDA in the way the Biden administration has done in the last few years.

Advertisement

“In an election where Americans have made it so clear where they are on abortion, these extremists continue to go against the will of the people. Whether through the Courts or the White House, MAGA Republicans are hell-bent on banning abortion,” Mini Timmaraju, president of Reproductive Freedom for All, said in a press release. “This is a five-alarm fire and we need to elect Kamala Harris as our next president and reproductive freedom majorities in the U.S. Congress to stop it.”

By piggybacking onto the original lawsuit, the Republican officials are able to file their complaint in Judge Matthew Kacsmaryk’s Texas courtroom. Kacsmaryk, a far-right Trump appointee well known for his anti-abortion views, is the federal judge who ruled last year that the FDA unlawfully approved mifepristone when it first went to market over two decades ago. Both Kacsmaryk and the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals are likely to side with the anti-abortion Republican officials.

Despite the attorneys general being from Kansas, Missouri and Idaho, a ruling in this case would impact the entire country.

There are many outlandish statements included in the 199-page complaint, including claims that medication abortion “starves the baby to death in the womb.” As highlighted by feminist writer Jessica Valenti, the first to report the amended complaint, one of the most bizarre claims the Republican officials include is that medication abortion is so terrifying that the sight of blood in a toilet will give women post-traumatic stress disorder. “Women who choose chemical abortion are more likely to continue associating their homes, or the bathroom, with abortion. The home may become a trigger for uncomfortable emotions rather than a refuge,” the suit claims.

Despite anti-abortion claims, mifepristone and misoprostol are more than 95% effective and pose fewer risks than Tylenol. Over 100 studies have corroborated their safety and effectiveness. Medication abortion accounts for 63% of abortion care in the U.S., according to a study from the reproductive rights group the Guttmacher Institute. In addition to abortion and miscarriage care, mifepristone is also used to treat other medical conditions, including Cushing’s syndrome and hyperglycemia, or high blood glucose.

Advertisement
is a senior correspondent at Vox, where he covers ideology and challenges to democracy, both at home and abroad. His book on democracy,, was published 0n July 16. You can purchase it here.

Here is a short and incomplete list of things that former President Donald Trump has done this week:

Throughout these events, Trump has come off as (alternately) a buffoon and a would-be dictator. One minute, you’re laughing at his campy dance moves and Hindenburg car rants, the next you’re worrying that he really might try to send troops after American citizens.

Yet the two Trumps, the clown and the menace, are intimately tied together: The absurdity helps normalize his dangerousness.

For his biggest supporters, the schtick helps generate a sense of joy in transgression. For non-MAGA Republicans, it helps them feel comfortable ignoring what makes Trump extraordinary in favor of traditional grubby partisanship. For many of Trump’s opponents, it makes him seem like something we don’t have to worry about all the time — even when we really do. His absurdity works to make a horrifying reality our reality, something assimilable into the mental frames that we use to get through the day.

I don’t think Trump does this by design. He’s not an evil genius, planning out moves 10 steps in advance. This is just who he is as a person; what you see on stage is what you get.

But that persona arose from a gut-level understanding of human behavior, one that has allowed Trump to build extraordinary political and business careers on a foundation of lying to everyone around him and pushing the boundaries of “normal” to the breaking point. Without his buffoonery, none of this works — you get unpopular figures like Gov. Ron DeSantis and Sen. JD Vance, who have all of Trump’s cruelty but none of his charm.

Put differently: the dancing is a kind of alchemy that takes his terrifying ideas, like deploying the military against “the enemy within,” and turns them into just another day in American politics.

The clown prince of America

In late 2016, the Atlantic published a campaign trail dispatch by Salena Zito, a conservative reporter, exploring Trump’s appeal to his voters. The piece was forgettable save one line, a description of Trump’s relationship to his fans that has been quoted endlessly for the past eight years: “The press takes him literally, but not seriously; his supporters take him seriously, but not literally.”

In context, Zito was talking about Trump lying about unemployment among young Black men. At the time, he claimed that the unemployment rate was about three times what it actually was — a figure he arrived at in part by counting full-time students as “unemployed.” Zito acknowledged that this is false in a literal sense, but believes the press is wrong to dismiss him over it. She believed Trump’s fans understand the inflated numbers to be emblematic of some larger truth, caring less about facticity than the general picture he paints of a broken America.

In the years since, “seriously not literally” has become a punchline among political journalists. Time after time, Trump and his fans have proven that they take his outlandish pronouncements literally. When he said the 2020 election was stolen and demanded Vice President Mike Pence unlawfully attempt to overturn it, he meant it — and his most hardcore supporters staged a riot to try to turn his vision into reality.

If there’s a group of Trump supporters whom Zito’s phrase actually describes, it’s not the superfans, but the squishes.

Republicans who blanched at January 6, but loved the tax cuts and court appointments that preceded it, are among the most likely to dismiss the idea that Trump should be taken at his word. For these Republicans, his authoritarianism pronouncements are just part of the Trump show — a kind of brand-burnishing performance on par with silly pronouncements like “hydrogen is the new car.”

With his most extraordinary ideas safely slotted into the clown box, they can return to treating him seriously as a “normal” Republican candidate for president: assessing his policies against Harris’s and naturally finding hers wanting. The bitter dilemma of choosing between a Democrat and democracy can be wished away.

As infuriating as this attitude is, it does have a little bit of grounding in truth. The truth is that all of us, to one degree or another, take Trump “seriously but not literally.” We do it because actually confronting what a second Trump presidency would mean is tough even for his most ardent critics to wrap their heads around.

If we took all of that literally, really integrated the reality of what these steps would mean into our daily behavior, it would be hard to live life normally. The specter of out-and-out authoritarianism, a crashing economy, and an international system shorn of the alliances that keep the global peace sounds apocalyptic. Actually trying to envision the enormity of this world is psychologically taxing; trying to live as if this were indeed an imminent possibility invariably leads to a life monomaniacally devoted to trying to stop it.

For most people, that’s neither desirable nor possible. And Trump’s fog of distortion creates a mental space where one can reasonably tell oneself it’s not necessary. He lies and exaggerates so much that it’s hard to tell which of his policy ideas demand being taken literally. You can make educated guesses — it’s achingly clear he’ll try to fight the 2024 election result if he loses — but that’s really the best any of us can do.

Trump demands to be taken literally, but taking everything he does seriously is both psychologically difficult and analytically mistaken. So it makes sense that we all do at least a little bit of “seriously, but not literally”: it helps manage the fear and uncertainty inherent to a second Trump presidency.

The buffoonery helps with that.

Laughing at Trump makes it easier to see him as something other than the boogeyman. I mean, look at him! He’s swaying on stage to “Ave Maria,” babbling about Pavarotti, making Kristi Noem sweat. Who couldn’t appreciate that?

We laugh not only because he’s funny (which he objectively is), but because then we don’t have to confront the reality of what he truly represents — at least, for a minute.

The problem, though, is that Trump is a fundamentally serious thing. He’s not just doing a traveling stand-up show; he’s running for president of the United States. He wants to be in charge of the most powerful nation in human history, for his fingers to be on a nuclear button that could annihilate the planet.

It would be bad enough if someone who wanted this kind of power were just a clown. That he’s a clown with a proven track record of doing insanely dangerous things makes the laughter feel a bit hollow.

Former President Barack Obama — who I’m convinced understands Trump better than almost anyone — recently gave a speech that distilled the problem down to its core. After describing some of Trump’s recent lies about hurricanes, Obama asked, “When did that become okay?” He expands:

If your coworkers acted like that, they wouldn’t be your coworkers very long. If you’re in business and somebody you’re doing business with just outright lies and manipulates you, you stop doing business with them. Even if you had a family member who acted like that, you might still love them, but you’d tell them you got a problem and you wouldn’t put them in charge of anything. And yet, when Donald Trump lies, cheats, or shows utter disregard for our Constitution, when he calls POWs “losers” or fellow citizens “vermin,” people make excuses for it.

And that’s just it. This shouldn’t be okay, but enough people have accepted it that it is by default okay.

The buffoonery helps us cope with the normalizing of the abnormal, the fact that the old rules for politics that kept things safe are being blown up at a faster and faster rate. When the prospect of a second Trump presidency feels too real, there’s always the comfort of laughing at him.

You’ve read 1 article in the last month Here at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country. Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change. We rely on readers like you — join us. Swati Sharma Vox Editor-in-Chief Membership Monthly Annual One-time $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month Other $50/year $100/year $150/year $200/year Other $25 $50 $100 $250 Other Join for $10/month We accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay.

You can also contribute via
By now, the basics of Donald Trump’s Stormy Daniels scandal are probably familiar. There is, however, a new twist in the story, suggesting that the ordeal has an important new chapter.

As regular readers probably recall, shortly before Election Day 2016, Trump paid the adult-film actress $130,000 as part of an agreement in which Daniels would keep quiet about an alleged sexual encounter she had with the future president. (Trump has denied having an affair with Daniels.) The point, of course, was to prevent the public from learning about the alleged encounter, which Daniels claims happened shortly after Trump’s third wife gave birth to his youngest child.

Trump’s former personal attorney, Michael Cohen, exposed the fact that Trump laundered the payments through his business to cover them up, ultimately leading to criminal charges against the former president. Prosecutors indicted the Republican on 34 felony counts, a jury found Trump guilty on all 34 counts. The GOP nominee for the nation’s highest office is currently awaiting sentencing.

But as bizarre as this might seem, there’s fresh evidence that, eight years after Trump paid Daniels to be quiet shortly before Election Day 2016, the Republican candidate is also trying to pay Daniels to be quiet shortly before Election Day 2024. As NBC News summarized:

Former President Donald Trump this summer offered a financial incentive to adult film star Stormy Daniels if she agreed to keep quiet about Trump — including about the relationship that became the center of the hush money payments that ended up the subject of a New York criminal trial — ahead of this November’s election, MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow reported on Wednesday.

For those who might’ve missed Rachel breaking the story on “All In with Chris Hayes,” let’s review what we now know.

A jury found Trump guilty of crimes related to the hush-money payment to the porn star, but Daniels still owed the former president a significant amount of money in legal fees stemming from a variety of cases, including an ill-fated defamation case filed by her now-imprisoned attorney.

She launched a crowd-funding campaign to raise enough money to pay those bills, which worked: Daniels owed Trump hundreds of thousands of dollars, and her supporters donated what she needed.

At that point, her lawyers began negotiating with the Republican candidate’s lawyers on the precise amount, accommodating questions regarding interest, according to written correspondence between the legal teams obtained by Rachel. At one point, Team Trump wanted $652,000, for example, while Team Daniels said the total should be closer to $600,000.

And as part of that process, the former president’s lawyers decided to add a variable to the negotiations: Trump would accept less money in exchange for Daniels’ silence.

In other words, Trump’s lawyers thought Daniels owed one amount, but they were prepared to accept less than that amount if the adult film actress signed an agreement not to talk about the former president.

Trump’s lawyer did not respond to requests for comment. In a statement to MSNBC, Trump campaign spokesperson Steven Cheung falsely asserted that the documents Maddow referenced “were attained as part of an illegal, foreign hacking attack against President Trump and his team.” The fact is, Daniels' lawyer provided the documents to Rachel.

“We disagree that a payment of $620,000 would be in full satisfaction of the three judgments,” Trump’s lawyers said in a July letter obtained by Rachel. “However, we can agree to settle these matters for $620,000, provided that your client agrees in writing to make no public or private statements related to any alleged past interactions with President Trump, or defamatory or disparaging statements about him, his businesses and/or any affiliates or his suitability as a candidate for President.”

So to review, Trump wanted $650,000. He was prepared to accept $620,000 alongside a signed NDA.

When Daniels balked, Trump agreed to accept $635,000 — and he got $627,500, without an NDA.

So what’s the bottom line? As Rachel summarized on the show, “The Republican nominee for president, Donald Trump, is currently awaiting sentencing for crimes related to a secret hush-money payment he made to porn star Stormy Daniels, just before the 2016 election, to keep her from talking about him — and specifically about having sex with him.

“And now just before the 2024 election, Trump has once again demanded that Stormy Daniels sign on to an agreement not to talk about him, offering to knock thousands of dollars off her bill if she did. Maybe this time, Trump has learned his lesson about not laundering this through his business, but he really is basically trying to do the same thing again.”
How to avoid sharing election misinformation

DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images

The 2024 election season is upon us. While Election Day is November 5, early voting started in September in some states. As we wait for the final results to be declared, chances are, you're going to come across false or misleading information.

To avoid spreading misinformation this election season, here are four things to consider.



We won't know the full picture the night of November 5

Election rules and procedures vary state by state. Within a state, they can even vary between counties. Some states allow mail-in ballots received before Election Day to be processed in advance. Others leave the processing and counting of mail-in ballots until after the polls close on Election Day.

Sponsor Message

This means results can shift dramatically over the course of election night, depending on which ballots are counted first. This happened in 2020 when states where then-President Donald Trump seemed to lead shifted in favor of Joe Biden late in the evening.

If you react strongly to new information, pause

It's normal to have an emotional response to information you encounter online or in the news. But if the information you just received elicits a particularly strong emotion in you, that might be a signal to hit the brakes, said Rachel Moran of the University of Washington's Center for an Informed Public. "A lot of misleading information is created intentionally to sow confusion or to create an emotional reaction. So if it's doing that in you, it doesn't necessarily mean that what you've read is wrong, but it is a good cue to sort of slow down," she said.

We have a desire to see our beliefs reflected back to us, so it's easy to agree with something if it reinforces our worldview — even if it's not true, said Hannah Covington, senior director of education content at the News Literacy Project. "When you see information that you just automatically agree with, that's really a signal to pause and maybe do a quick search."

Sponsor Message

Consider how trustworthy your source of information is

Open up your preferred search engine and do a quick keyword search to see what other trustworthy sources are saying about the piece of information you're evaluating. "If you don't see something reported by multiple news outlets, then it's probably time to just wait [before sharing]," said Covington.

When considering whether a news source is trustworthy, look for how it handles errors in its reporting. Trusting a source that makes errors might seem counterintuitive, "but actually correcting information when there's an inaccuracy is a huge sign of credibility," Covington told NPR.

Apply caution with information that's been translated from another language. A good translator requires knowledge of the language and the culture so they can discern whether the original message is meant to be satirical or ironic, said Laura Zommer, co-founder and CEO of Factchequeado.

If you receive a message on WhatsApp that's marked as "forwarded" or "forwarded many times," "be especially cautious, as this indicates that the author of the content is unclear and not the person who sent [you] the message," Zommer told NPR in an email.



Be wary of what photos and videos are supposed to "prove"

Take care when evaluating images, video and audio. They are easily manipulated or taken out of context. Take this 2020 tweet alleging voter suppression, supposedly evidenced by a photo of a pile of mailboxes. It reads, "Photo taken in Wisconsin. This is happening right before our eyes. They are sabotaging USPS to sabotage vote by mail. This is massive voter suppression and part of their plan to steal the election."

UCLA law professor Richard L. Hasen investigated the claim in his 2022 book, Cheap Speech: How Disinformation Poisons Our Politics – And How To Cure It. As it turns out, while the photo is real, the allegation of voter suppression was not. The mailboxes were pictured outside of a business which had a contract to repair old mailboxes for the U.S. Postal Service, not scrap them.

In this day and age, Moran said "the old adage … 'seeing is believing' just doesn't really hold truth anymore." When you come across a piece of media online, it's worth asking: "is what I'm hearing or seeing AI generated? Or could it be real and edited in a deceptive fashion?"

Ultimately, "it's up to us to protect ourselves and our communities [from misinformation] by only sharing what's verified," said Covington.

NPR's Brett Neely contributed reporting to this story.
This article was published in partnership with the Marshall Project, a nonprofit news organization covering the U.S. criminal justice system. Sign up for their newsletters, and follow them on Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.

November’s election—the first to feature a prominent candidate with a slew of felony convictions—comes at an inflection point in the voting rights landscape for the formerly incarcerated.

Roughly 2 million people with felony convictions have regained the right to vote since the late 1990s, according to an analysis by the Sentencing Project, a research and advocacy organization working to reduce the number of people behind bars in the U.S. These restoration efforts—legislative changes, ballot initiatives, and executive actions in 26 states and the District of Columbia—were largely bipartisan.

Advertisement

Despite the sea change, incarcerated people are rarely asked for their political views. Most will be eligible to vote once they return home. In 2020, the Marshall Project’s first-of-its-kind political survey revealed strong support for Donald Trump, shattering a commonly held notion that people behind bars would overwhelmingly support Democrats.

This time around, we wanted to know what people in prison and jail thought about an election that has been cast as a contest between “a prosecutor and a convicted felon.”

More than 54,000 people in 785 prisons and jails in 45 states and the District of Columbia responded. Here is what we found:

• Most respondents said they would vote for Trump, and support was particularly strong among white men. A substantial minority of Black men said they’d vote for Trump, too, if given the chance.

Advertisement

• As previous surveys showed, a large share of people behind bars from all racial backgrounds don’t identify with either major political party—instead identifying as independent.

• A majority of those who identified as Democrats and independents said the country is ready for a woman president. Republicans are more divided on the question.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

• When Kamala Harris replaced President Joe Biden as the nominee, she won more support, appealing to a subset of Trump supporters or people who said they wouldn’t vote in a previous version of the survey.

Public sentiment about disenfranchisement as a punishment for crime is changing, too. A majority of voters said they’d support a law guaranteeing voting rights for people 18 and older, including those in prison or on probation or parole, according to a 2022 poll conducted on behalf of several criminal justice advocacy organizations. Just a few years before that, a majority of Americans said they were against people voting from behind bars.

Advertisement

Public policy, however, still lags behind public opinion. In 2023, Rep. Ayanna Pressley and Sen. Peter Welch introduced a bill that would grant people in prison the right to vote while incarcerated. But it has stalled in the Senate Judiciary Committee. A bill that would do the same for prisoners in Washington state faced a similar fate earlier this year. The District of Columbia restored the right to vote to people in prison in 2020. Still, only a handful of states allow some people in prison to cast a ballot. And although most people in jail can still vote on Election Day, few do because of numerous obstacles.

Advertisement

Felony disenfranchisement also affects voting habits of those without felony records. Research consistently shows that voter turnout is lower in communities in which a large share of people go to prison. And even minimal contact with the legal system—a traffic stop or a weekend in jail—can keep people from showing up at the ballot box.

Advertisement

What’s more, nearly 113 million people—almost half of all adults in the U.S.—have an immediate relative who is or has been in prison or jail. And roughly 79 million people in the U.S. have a criminal record of some kind. Yet many survey respondents said the way incarceration shapes Americans’ lives is often ignored during campaign season.

Advertisement

“They barely even speak of the prison population, when we have more people locked up than anywhere in the world,” Donarico Caudle, a survey respondent incarcerated in North Carolina said in an interview. “I understand that we have a lot of things going on in the world, but mass incarceration is a very, very serious matter.”

Advertisement

How We Conducted This Survey

The Marshall Project partnered with two tablet providers in prisons and jails to conduct this survey. Ultimately, we ran two surveys, asking respondents to answer a few additional questions once Harris became the Democratic nominee. Participation in the survey was voluntary, so it’s important to keep in mind that responses are coming from a self-selecting group of people who may already be politically engaged and following the news.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Roughly 63 percent of more than 47,000 respondents who shared their race identified as people of color or mixed race, with 26 percent identifying as Black, 20 percent as Latino, 13 percent as Native American, and 17 percent percent as Asian or other races. Another 37 percent identified as white alone, and about 7,000 respondents did not give any race information. (The nonwhite race numbers exceed 63 percent because respondents could select multiple races.)

Advertisement

Most have completed some high school and are between 26 and 55 years old. Eighty-two percent are men, 12 percent are women, and about 1.5 percent are transgender or gender nonconforming. Thirty-two percent have not been convicted and are awaiting court dates in a county jail, or did not know whether they had been sentenced or not. More than half of the roughly 25,000 people who provided an answer said they’ll spend anywhere from 10 years to the rest of their lives in prison.

Our survey is intended to be a snapshot of politics behind bars, but it has limitations. Respondents skewed whiter than the overall prison population. Black people are incarcerated in state prisons at five times the rate of white people, according to an analysis of state prison populations by the Sentencing Project. In 12 states, more than half the prison population is Black, the analysts found.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As a result, the survey is not representative of the overall prison population. So instead of focusing solely on the respondents as a whole, we looked for trends across race, gender, party affiliation, and other demographic categories to ensure our reported results were meaningful. We also surfaced as many individual voices and opinions as possible. In future iterations, we hope to provide a more representative view. Our research partner at Columbia University, assistant professor of sociology David J. Knight, is currently developing survey weights to make the survey representative of the demographics, types of facilities, and geography of the United States jail and prison population.

An Independent Streak Behind Bars

Of the more than 54,000 survey respondents, 35 percent said they identify as independents. Outside of prisons and jails, independents have consistently made up the largest share of the American electorate. Over the past three years, as approval of Biden has waned, support for independents ticked up, tying the last recorded high of 43 percent in 2014.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

For most Americans, identifying as independent does not mean an outright rejection of either political party. Additional polling shows that a majority of people who identify as independent still lean toward one major political party or another.

Advertisement

Advertisement

By contrast, half of the incarcerated independents said they lean toward neither party. The rest are roughly equally divided among Republicans and Democrats.

The independent streak comes at a cost to Democrats, who make up 18 percent of respondents. This election has strengthened the sentiment that Democrats do not have incarcerated people’s best interests at heart. Many respondents said they take issue with the way the party has made Trump’s felony convictions a central feature of Harris’ election campaign. Others reject Biden for his championing of the 1994 crime bill. And some flatly reject Harris because she was a prosecutor.

Limited access to news in prison and jail is also a factor. Several survey respondents said they struggled to get solid information while locked up. Some said they could not answer survey questions about Harris or Trump because they didn’t have access to enough facts to form an opinion.

Advertisement

“I can’t afford the news subscription fee. I am only able to read article titles,” one respondent wrote, referring to news apps available on prison tablets. Another respondent told us in an interview that staff regularly censored newspapers, especially if there were stories about criminal justice or other topics officials did not want them to see.

Advertisement

For Janelle Suthers, who is incarcerated at Perryville women’s prison in Arizona, limited news access is disempowering. She said she can get mainstream stories that cover the big news of the day on the TV. But she is frustrated she can’t do deeper research on topics that matter to her. During an election with such high stakes, the lack of information makes her anxious. “It is isolating. It is frustrating. It makes you feel powerless,” she said in an interview.

Advertisement

Despite independent survey respondents’ stated rejection of both political parties, Trump holds sway over those respondents. Roughly 46 percent said they would vote for him if given the chance. Another 29 percent said they’d vote for a third-party candidate or wouldn’t vote at all.

Advertisement

The Trump Factor

Trump’s policies are at odds with most criminal justice reformers. He supports the death penalty for people convicted of drug dealing and has been critical of efforts to curb police violence. And he has repeatedly made racist comments about crime.

Despite Trump’s punitive approach, he enjoys robust support from people behind bars—especially among white men.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

“I’d say there is a majority of open support for Trump within the inmate population here, especially among the whites,” wrote Enrique Banda-Garcia, a Trump supporter who is incarcerated in Washington State Penitentiary. “And yes, we understand that Republicans are very tough on criminals and even tougher on us during our incarceration, nevertheless, Trump remains very popular here.”

Incarcerated people’s political views are often shaped by the racial segregation in their facilities. The segregation dictates which news programs people watch and with whom they’ll spend the vast majority of their time while locked up. Our previous survey revealed ardent support for Trump among white men. Many said they formed their opinions by consuming conservative news media. Across both surveys, respondents routinely remarked that white people in prison tend to watch Fox News or Newsmax, while Black people gravitate toward CNN or MSNBC where the channels are available.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Some respondents were hopeful that Trump’s experience with the legal system would make him more sympathetic to people behind bars. Donarico Caudle, who is incarcerated in North Carolina, said in an interview that he thought Trump was going to take a look at problems after going through his own trial. “There are things that you see when you look at this legal system that’s dirty,” Caudle said.

Trump’s trial for paying hush money to a porn star before the 2016 election was closely watched by respondents of both parties. Seventy-four percent of Republicans and 70 percent of Democrats said they watched the trial “very” or “somewhat” closely. But respondents were sharply divided about how the former president should be punished for his crimes.

Advertisement

Many respondents who said Trump should be incarcerated cited basic fairness: They were sentenced to prison time for their crimes, so Trump should be, too. “The law should be the great equalizer,” one respondent wrote. “No one should be above another in terms of the range of punishments nor given leniency simply because they’re a certain way (I.e. richer or a celebrity).”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

For others, incarceration was a strategic choice. If the former president goes to prison, maybe he would be compelled to make changes when he gets out. “Donald Trump needs to see with his own eyes what normal people suffer here in prison, and how unjust is all the laws and the prison system,” one respondent wrote.

Advertisement

Compared with people outside prison, incarcerated survey respondents were more inclined to be lenient toward Trump. Only a third of incarcerated people surveyed thought he should be sentenced to prison for his crimes, compared with about half of people on the outside, according to an Associated Press poll. Even those who disliked Trump cited their feelings about prison being harmful as a reason to oppose his incarceration.

Advertisement

Like their peers on the outside, a significant majority of incarcerated Republicans, roughly 73 percent, said it was “definitely” or “probably” good for Trump to be a dictator on Day One of his presidency. Seventy-four percent of Republicans on the outside felt the same.

Ready for a Woman

When Biden dropped out of the race, we distributed a second survey. The first survey showed minimal support for Biden with only 18 percent of respondents saying they approved of the way he was handling his job. Incarcerated Democrats tended to be more critical than those on the outside, with just 38 percent approving of the president compared with 61 percent of Democrats in the general electorate.

Advertisement

Advertisement

With the second survey, we wanted to gauge if people behind bars would have a more favorable view of Harris—and of the potential for a woman president—despite her record as a prosecutor.

Related From Slate Suddenly, the Electoral College Is Posing a Problem for Trump Read More

Incarcerated survey respondents believe the country is ready for a woman president around the same rate as the general electorate. Polling on the outside shows that 79 percent of Democrats and 35 percent of Republicans believe the country is ready for a woman president. Behind bars, 79 percent of Democrats and 34 percent of Republicans also said yes. Independent respondents were less certain, with 55 percent saying they thought the country was ready.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Openness to a woman president doesn’t necessarily translate into support for Harris. Survey respondents were split on their view of the vice president. Respondents held favorable and unfavorable views at the same rate: 35 percent. The rest said they had no view or had never heard of her.

Advertisement

Tough on Crime?

For many survey respondents, Harris’ record on crime loomed large. The more familiar respondents were with her record as a prosecutor, the less favorable their view of her. About 56 percent of respondents who said they were “very familiar” with the vice president held an “unfavorable opinion.” And 46 percent of respondents who said they were “familiar” with her felt the same way.

Harris’ record on crime is hotly contested. She has styled herself as a “progressive prosecutor,” pointing to her adoption of programs that steered some people away from prison. The Trump campaign has cast the vice president as “too soft” on crime during her tenure in San Francisco. Legal analysts have argued that Harris’ record is mixed at best, noting how difficult it is to define what makes a prosecutor progressive.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Survey respondents who said they were familiar with her record did not see her as a progressive or too soft on crime. Of those who said they were “very familiar” with her record, 52 percent believe she was “tough on crime,” with only 13 percent saying she was “not tough enough on crime.” The same trend applies to respondents who were “familiar” with her record. Roughly 43 percent said she was tough on crime; 11 percent said she wasn’t tough enough. The remaining respondents said she was just right on crime or held no opinion.

Advertisement

Nearly 18 percent of survey respondents are incarcerated in California. For some, their opinion of the vice president is informed by personal experience.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

At 18, Brandon Baker was sentenced to life in prison for a home invasion. His sentence was enhanced because of gang activity. He is now 42 years old and incarcerated in California State Prison. Like many of his peers, Baker thinks Harris would be a good president, but he is wrestling with supporting the woman who was attorney general in a state that has rejected his bids for earlier release. He said Harris helped drive mass incarceration and needs to take responsibility for the harm she has caused.

Advertisement

“I just wish Kamala Harris would just get out in front of it and say: ‘You know, what I did was wrong, this is how we can rectify it,’ ” he said. “And I haven’t heard her do that.”

Advertisement

Crime, “a Felon,” and “a Prosecutor”

Attacking an opponent’s record on crime is a campaign staple. Republicans are advocating for policies that remove rights from people with felony convictions, despite their own candidate having a record. Democrats have adopted language like felon that denigrates people with a criminal record, despite having a base that is disproportionately affected by the legal system.

When Harris picked Gov. Tim Walz as her running mate, the Trump campaign quickly attacked his record on voting rights for Minnesotans with felony convictions. As governor, Walz signed a bill restoring voting rights to an estimated 55,000 Minnesotans who had served time in prison.

The new law brings Minnesota’s felony disenfranchisement laws in line with those in New York, where the former president is convicted of 34 felonies. He is only eligible to vote in Florida (where he is registered) because New York only bars people with felony convictions from voting while they’re incarcerated.

Advertisement

The GOP has tried to revoke voting rights for the incarcerated across the country. In Nebraska, the Republican attorney general issued an opinion that a 2024 law to restore voting rights to people immediately after leaving prison was unconstitutional. In Virginia, the Republican governor rescinded a policy of automatic voting rights restoration to people who finished their felony sentences. Election officials in Tennessee have blocked nearly all rights restoration by adding more requirements that disqualify people with felony convictions.

Most notably, the Republican-led Legislature in Florida erected nearly insurmountable barriers to rights restoration after residents overwhelmingly decided to restore the vote to some people with convictions in 2018.

Advertisement

The Harris campaign cast the election as between a “felon and prosecutor,” in a video ad that aired during the Democratic National Convention in August. The news media as well as prominent Democrats embraced the description. On the campaign trail Harris boasted that she has taken on “perpetrators of all kinds,” and knows “Donald Trump’s type.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Despite Trump’s track record of flouting the norms of American democracy, Democrats have focused on Trump’s felony convictions in their campaign. The former president is far from typical of those ensnared in the criminal legal system. But the Harris campaign has weaponized the stigma of the label felon to suggest it’s the reason why he is unfit to hold public office.

Many survey respondents said the stigma undercuts their full reintegration into society.

“How can I expect to be taken seriously by my government/society,” asked one survey respondent who is incarcerated in Arizona, “when there’s such a strong expectation for Trump to be discarded for being a felon?”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WASHINGTON (AP) — Mitch McConnell said after the 2020 election that then-President Donald Trump was “stupid as well as being ill-tempered,” a “despicable human being” and a “narcissist,” according to excerpts from a new biography of the Senate Republican leader that will be released this month.

McConnell made the remarks in private as part of a series of personal oral histories that he made available to Michael Tackett, deputy Washington bureau chief of The Associated Press.

Advertisement

Tackett’s book, “The Price of Power,” draws from almost three decades of McConnell’s recorded diaries and from years of interviews with the normally reticent Kentucky Republican.

The animosity between Trump and McConnell is well known — Trump once called McConnell “a dour, sullen, and unsmiling political hack.”

But McConnell’s private comments are by far his most brutal assessment of the former president and could be seized on by Democrats before the Nov. 5 election. The biography will be released Oct. 29, one week before Election Day that will decide if Trump returns to the White House.

The animosity between Trump and McConnell is well known. via Associated Press

Advertisement

Despite those strong words, McConnell has endorsed Trump’s 2024 run, saying earlier this year “it should come as no surprise” that he would support the Republican party’s nominee. He shook Trump’s hand in June when Trump visited GOP senators on Capitol Hill.

McConnell, 82, announced this year that he will step aside as Republican leader after the election but stay in the Senate through the end of his term in 2026.

McConnell was ‘counting the days’ until Trump left office

The comments about Trump quoted in the book came in the weeks before the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol. Trump was then actively trying to overturn his loss to Democrat Joe Biden. McConnell feared this would hurt Republicans in two Georgia runoffs and cost them the Senate majority. Democrats won both races.

Publicly, McConnell had congratulated Biden after the Electoral College certified the presidential vote and the senator warned his fellow Republicans not to challenge the results. But he did not say much else.

Privately, he said in his oral history that “it’s not just the Democrats who are counting the days” until Trump left office, and that Trump’s behavior “only underscores the good judgment of the American people. They’ve had just enough of the misrepresentations, the outright lies almost on a daily basis, and they fired him.”

Advertisement

“And for a narcissist like him,” McConnell continued, “that’s been really hard to take, and so his behavior since the election has been even worse, by far, than it was before, because he has no filter now at all.”

Before those Georgia runoffs, McConnell said Trump is “stupid as well as being ill-tempered and can’t even figure out where his own best interests lie.”

Trump was also holding up a coronavirus aid package at the time, despite bipartisan support. “This despicable human being,” McConnell said in his oral history, “is sitting on this package of relief that the American people desperately need.”

On Jan. 6, soon after he made those comments, McConnell was holed up in a secure location with other congressional leaders, calling Vice President Mike Pence and military officials for reinforcements as Trump supporters stormed the Capitol. Once the Senate resumed debate over the certification of Biden’s victory, McConnell said in a speech on the floor that “this failed attempt to obstruct the Congress, this failed insurrection, only underscores how crucial the task before us is for our republic.”

McConnell then went to his office to address his staff, some of whom had barricaded themselves in the office as rioters banged on their doors. He started to sob softly as he thanked them, Tackett writes.

Advertisement

“You are my family, and I hate the fact that you had to go through this,” he told them.

The next month, McConnell gave his harshest public criticism of Trump on the Senate floor, saying he was “ practically and morally responsible ” for the Jan. 6 attack. Still, McConnell voted to acquit Trump after House Democrats impeached him for inciting the riot.

Years of doubts and criticism

In a statement to the AP on Thursday, McConnell referenced two fellow Republican senators — JD Vance of Ohio, the vice presidential nominee, and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, both of whom are strong Trump allies after harshly criticizing him during his first run in 2016.

“Whatever I may have said about President Trump pales in comparison to what JD Vance, Lindsey Graham, and others have said about him, but we are all on the same team now,” McConnell said.

McConnell also had doubts about Trump from the start. Just after Trump was elected in 2016, as Congress was certifying the election, McConnell told Biden, then the outgoing vice president, that he thought Trump could be trouble, Tackett writes.

The book channels McConnell’s inner thoughts during some of the biggest moments after Trump took office, as McConnell held his tongue and as the two men repeatedly fought and made up.

Advertisement

In 2017, as Trump publicly criticized McConnell for the Senate’s failure to repeal the Affordable Care Act, Trump and McConnell had a heated argument on the phone. Weeks went by with no contact. Then Trump invited McConnell to the White House and called a joint news conference without telling him first. McConnell said the event went fine, and “it’s not hard to look more knowledgeable than Donald Trump at a press conference.”

After the passage of a $1.5 billion tax overhaul that same year, McConnell said, “All of a sudden, I’m Trump’s new best friend.”

He blamed Trump after House Republicans lost their majority in the 2018 midterm elections, Tackett writes. Trump ”has every characteristic you would not want a president to have,” McConnell said in an oral history at the time, and was “not very smart, irascible, nasty.”

In 2022, as Trump continued to criticize McConnell and made racist comments about his wife, former Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao, McConnell told Tackett that “I can’t think of anybody I’d rather be criticized by than this sleazeball.”

“Every time he takes a shot at me, I think it’s good for my reputation,” McConnell said.

Also in 2022, McConnell said in his oral history that Trump’s behavior since losing the election had been “beyond erratic” as he kept pushing false allegations of voter fraud. “Unfortunately, about half the Republicans in the country believe whatever he says,” McConnell said.

Advertisement

By 2024, McConnell had again endorsed Trump. He felt he had to if he were to continue to play a role in shaping the nation’s agenda.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

WICHITA FALLS, Texas — Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and his Democratic challenger, Rep. Colin Allred (D-Texas), are pitching themselves to voters as defenders of women in the final weeks of a Senate race that provides one of the few last-dash hopes Democrats have to retain control of the U.S. Senate.

The difference? A threat that Allred is discussing, to the safety and health of women living under Texas’ abortion ban, is very real, with multiple Texas women speaking out about their recent terrible experiences.

Advertisement

A threat that Cruz is hyping — of out transgender athletes playing in girls sports — is rare enough that Cruz generally avoids pointing to examples of it happening in Texas, where state lawmakers have already enacted laws to stamp it out.

How Texan voters interpret these two threats could determine control of the U.S. Senate. With Republicans all but certain to pick up one seat this election cycle, Democrats need to win in Texas, Florida or Montana to have a hope of holding Congress’ upper chamber. Polls have shown Cruz with a small but consistent lead over Allred, though a leaked Republican polling memo showed him up by only 1 percentage point earlier this week.

Ahead of a Tuesday evening debate, Cruz launched a new TV ad accusing Allred, a former NFL linebacker, of wanting to let boys play in girls sports — the latest campaign commercial in a series that included one spot, from a group backing Cruz, showing an Allred look-alike in a football uniform tackling a girl. It’s the third ad released in the past month that’s focused on transgender issues in a bid to boost Cruz, as many as his campaign has devoted to any other topic.

In other Senate races, Republicans are deploying the same strategy, airing ads warning of boys playing girls sports in Montana, Ohio and Wisconsin.

Advertisement

Allred countered during Tuesday evening’s debate by suggesting Cruz is only trying to distract from Texas’ abortion ban.

“What he wants you thinking about is kids in bathrooms so you’re not thinking about women in hospitals,” Allred said. “We have Texas women being turned away from hospitals, bleeding out in their cars, in waiting rooms, being found by their husbands.”

Rep. Colin Allred (D-Texas), left, and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) participate in a U.S. Senate debate, Tuesday, Oct. 15, 2024, in Dallas. Shelby Tauber/Texas Tribune via Associated Press

After conservative Supreme Court justices, whom Cruz supported, overturned the federal right to abortion in 2022, Texas and many other Republican-led states banned the procedure, prompting doctors to refuse to perform abortions even when a mother’s health is at stake. Abortion has been a major political drag for Republicans ever since, contributing to an underwhelming performance in the 2022 midterm elections and various special elections, as Democrats maintain a massive advantage among female voters.

“All of a sudden, the protector of women and girls is going to be Sen. Cruz? Who thinks it’s perfectly reasonable that if a girl is raped by a relative of hers, a victim of incest, that she should be forced to carry that child to term and give birth to it?” Allred said on Tuesday. “You’re going to set yourself up as the protector of women and girls? It’s laughable.”

Advertisement

Hours before this week’s debate, the Allred campaign staged a press conference with three women who said they couldn’t get abortions even when complications to their wanted pregnancies posed significant risks to their health.

“We learned our baby would never survive, and the risks to my health and a future pregnancy were growing, and the Texas abortion ban made a terribly difficult decision impossible to make in my home state,” said Kate Cox, who wound up traveling out of state for an abortion that she said saved her ability to get pregnant again.

“I’m pregnant today because I had access to abortion care. I wouldn’t be pregnant today if that wasn’t the case,” she said.

Kate Cox and other women who navigated the Texas abortion ban speak against Ted Cruz ahead of tonight’s debate with Colin Allred.



“Ted Cruz says these abortion bans are reasonable. I have personally seen the devastation.” pic.twitter.com/qKXAAWRLGf — Arthur Delaney 🇺🇸 (@ArthurDelaneyHP) October 15, 2024

Both abortion access and opposition to transgender rights have emerged as top election issues in Texas and across the country, with Donald Trump’s Republican presidential campaign this month releasing an ad claiming that his Democratic opponent, Vice President Kamala Harris, supports “sex change” operations for federal prisoners. (The Federal Bureau of Prisons recently said that a total of two federal inmates have undergone gender-affirming surgeries, after taking the government to court.)

Advertisement

Harris noted in a Fox News interview Wednesday that federal inmates had also received gender-affirming care during Trump’s 2017-2021 presidency because federal law requires it. She dismissed Trump’s ad attacks as focused on a topic with little relevance to America.

“He has spent $20 million on those ads ... on an issue that, as it relates to the biggest issues that affect the American people, is really quite remote,” Harris told Fox News’ Bret Baier.

As Cox and the women who stood with her Tuesday can attest, abortion access may be a more tangible policy question for most people than gender-affirming surgery for federal inmates or the rare phenomenon of transgender girls competing on sports teams that match their gender identity.

In a brief interview after a rally in Wichita Falls, HuffPost asked Cruz if he knew of any examples of transgender athletes competing in Texas. Cruz didn’t cite any specific cases.

“There have been multiple examples, but this issue illustrates just how far out of the mainstream Colin Allred is,” Cruz told HuffPost. “Overwhelming majority of Texans, overwhelming majority of Americans don’t believe boys should compete in girls sports, don’t believe men should compete against women’s sports.”

Advertisement

Cruz claimed two men participated in the 2024 Summer Olympics as women, something that the International Olympic Committee has flatly said is untrue.

Nationally, there have been just a few dozen instances of out transgender athletes, whether male or female, competing in college sports over the past decade, and even fewer instances of them displacing cisgender athletes on teams or in competitions.

A Cruz campaign spokesperson noted that last year in Dallas, a transgender girl won in the under-14 girls category of an Irish dancing competition, prompting a backlash from some parents. (The competition wasn’t affiliated with Texas public schools, however, so it was beyond the reach of a state policy restricting trans athletes’ participation on teams that don’t correspond to the gender on their birth certificate.) And in 2022, The Texas Tribune interviewed a 16-year-old trans girl who said Texas law prevented her from participating in track meets.

Last month, a Cruz campaign flyer featured an image of Mack Beggs, a trans man and former Texas high school wrestler who wanted to wrestle against boys in the 2010s but was required by the state to wrestle in the girls division because Beggs wasn’t assigned male at birth. In other words, Beggs’ case was not exactly the “boys in girls sports” situation Cruz bemoans in his campaign.

During his Wichita Falls rally, Cruz supporters booed when he told them Allred had “vocally supported having boys compete in girls sports.” Several attendees told HuffPost it was their top issue after border security and the economy.

Advertisement

Terrie Cribbs, a retiree who lives in Wichita Falls, said she has been increasingly aware of transgender girls participating in girls sports over the past couple of years.

“It’s just getting worse and worse as people are getting crazier and crazier,” Cribbs said, adding that she was not aware of any such cases in Texas. “We got common sense.”

Allred has said in TV ads and during Tuesday night’s debate that he doesn’t support boys in girls sports, as Cruz has stated.

“I don’t support these ridiculous things that he’s talking about,” Allred said at the event, without saying specifically that he’s against allowing transgender girls to participate in girls sports. Allred’s comments have drawn some fire from transgender activists, who have questioned his adoption of Cruz’s framing of the issue.

Advertisement

Cruz has pointed to Allred’s vote in 2021 for the Equality Act, a bill that would have prohibited discrimination based on gender, and last year against the Protection of Women and Girls in Sports Act, which would cut federal funding to colleges and universities that allow “individuals of the male sex” to take roster spots on women’s teams.

Rep. Lizzie Fletcher (D-Texas), speaking on Allred’s behalf after the debate, told reporters that those votes were insignificant.

“Sen. Cruz referred a lot to the voting record, and I took the same votes at the same time and I don’t know half the things he was talking about,” Fletcher said. “That happens a whole lot. You see in Congress all the time these votes that are kind of ‘gotcha votes.’ And then you see the campaigns and the candidates come out and talk about how there was one sentence in some bill that was about something else and that shows that they voted on something.”

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott (R) in 2021 and 2023 signed bills requiring student athletes in Texas public schools to compete on teams corresponding to their biological sex. These established in Texas essentially the same protections envisioned by the bill Allred voted against, which was passed by the U.S. House, ignored by the Senate and never expected to become law.

When he was asked during the debate about whether he supported exceptions to abortion bans for cases of rape and incest, Cruz avoided answering directly, but said it was fitting that the Supreme Court had thrown out the federal right to abortion and allowed states like Texas to enact their bans — basically the same setup he’s suggesting is inadequate for girls sports.

Advertisement
Two weeks later, it remains the most memorable moment of the vice presidential debate. Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz asked Ohio Sen. JD Vance, “Did he [Trump] lose the 2020 election?” The Republican refused to answer.

In the days that followed, the GOP vice presidential nominee faced the same question, over and over again. In each instance, Vance simply would not say whether his running mate won or lost — and in the process, the senator failed to acknowledge the legitimacy of the last American presidential election.

In one especially memorable exchange, The New York Times asked Vance five times whether Trump lost the 2020 race. Five times, Vance refused to answer, justifying his reluctance in an utterly absurd way.

That was last week. This week, as NBC News reported, there was a breakthrough of sorts.

In his most direct answer yet about the 2020 election results since he joined the Republican presidential ticket, Sen. JD Vance of Ohio appeared to say Wednesday that he does not believe Donald Trump lost the last presidential election. Fielding questions from reporters after he spoke at a rally in central Pennsylvania, Vance was pressed about recent appearances in which he has declined directly to say whether or not Trump lost his re-election bid against Joe Biden.

“I’ve answered this question directly a million times,” the GOP candidate said. “No. I think there are serious problems in 2020. So did Donald Trump lose the election? Not by the words that I would use.”

Vance used the most needlessly clumsy phrasing possible — how a bestselling author came up with “not by the words that I would use” I’ll never know — perhaps hoping the indirect word choice would make him look and sound less like an election denier.

But that won’t work. The GOP candidate is an election denier.

The facts are unambiguous. Vance saw the results of a free and fair election; he saw the results of dozens of lawsuits; he saw Trump fail spectacularly for nearly four years to produce even a shred of evidence; and he saw key figures surrounding Trump — his campaign manager, campaign data team, campaign lawyers, independent researchers, et al. — agree that the GOP’s 2020 ticket really did lose, fair and square.

And it’s against this backdrop that the Republican Party’s nominee for the nation’s second-highest office — after dodging straightforward questions for two weeks — has nevertheless decided to reject the legitimacy of an election outcome decided by his own country’s electorate.

There is no defense for such an overt rejection of democracy. Democrats have spent much of the 2024 race arguing that both members of the Republican ticket are hostile toward the American political system and the rule of law. Vance has now taken fresh steps to prove them right.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

A court filing unsealed by federal prosecutors details how a Texas man and his friends brought an arsenal of guns with them to Washington, D.C., and how he snuck one onto the Capitol grounds during the deadly Jan. 6, 2021 insurrection attempt.

Roger Preacher was first charged in May of last year with unlawful possession of a firearm on the Capitol grounds on the day of the insurrection. He carried a .22 caliber Walther P22 pistol in his waistband on the Capitol’s lower west terrace, where some of the worst violence of the day erupted.

Advertisement

Preacher was arraigned in May and pleaded guilty, but his case was put under seal. U.S. attorneys told a judge there was “sensitive information” specific to Preacher’s plea agreement that couldn’t be released publicly at the time. With those concerns apparently resolved, prosecutors unsealed the case last week.

The newly released records offer disturbing details about Preacher’s foray to Washington, where he attended the “Stop the Steal” rally that would end in the storming of Congress and an attempt to overturn the election.

According to prosecutors, Preacher drove from Texas to Virginia with two other men, Jason Parsons and Mario Mares. They started texting about their plans around Jan. 2, and on the journey discussed “firearms laws in the District of Columbia and ... knew it would be unlawful to bring firearms into the city,” the records allege.

Prosecutors said the three men drove from Texas to a Virginia suburb of D.C. in Mares’ car, which they’d loaded with a bag of guns, and they checked into a hotel to prepare for the rally on Jan. 6. The next day, Preacher drove himself and his friends from Virginia into D.C., and though the men left their rifles behind in the car, Preacher tucked the .22 caliber into a holster on his waist. Prosecutors say the men made it to the lower west terrace of the Capitol grounds, and Preacher was in that location for an hour before getting separated from his group.

Advertisement

Back at their hotel room in Virginia, the three men discussed hearing about arrests and decided to flee back to Texas. But before they headed home, they took a picture of their guns and tactical gear and posted it to Facebook.

“Fuck Washington DC,” the caption read.

The gun Preacher carried with him at the Capitol is in the center of the photo, along with a red MAGA hat and other items.

Prosecutors are asking that Preacher be sentenced to zero to six months in prison and that he pay a fine ranging anywhere from $500 to $9,500. That would be a bargain, considering the charges he faces: Without a plea deal, he was looking at up to five years in prison and a fine of $250,000.

In exchange for his guilty plea, prosecutors agreed not to bring any other charges against him.

Preacher waived his right to a jury trial. It is unclear when he will be sentenced, but records show that a joint status report for his sentencing is due before Oct. 28.

An attorney for Preacher did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Parsons was charged with unlawful possession of a firearm on Capitol grounds in April 2023 and pleaded guilty after striking a deal with prosecutors. His case was sealed until September 30, 2024.

Advertisement

Mares was indicted in March 2023 and charged with multiple offenses including entering and remaining in a restricted building with a deadly weapon, disorderly conduct and unlawful possession of a firearm. Mares pleaded not guilty and opted to have a bench trial. The bench trial concluded on Oct. 4 and a verdict is imminent from U.S. District Judge Ana Reyes.

The revelations about Preacher come just a day after Donald Trump said during a Univision town hall event that there were no guns at the U.S. Capitol on Jan 6.

Lumping himself in with the rioters, Trump remarked that “we didn’t have guns” but “the others” — the police who defended the Capitol building that day — did.

Preacher is far from the only Jan. 6 defendant who was armed at the Capitol that day. Participants in the riot brought guns, knives, baseball bats, stun guns, and chemical irritants like bear spray. Several defendants have pleaded guilty to carrying weapons on Jan. 6, including Guy Reffitt, Mark Mazza and Chris Alberts.

The far-right militia known as the Oath Keepers also brought a massive cache of weapons to a hotel room in northern Virginia, as the 2022 seditious conspiracy trial of some of the group’s leaders revealed. The group called members who transported and guarded the guns a “quick reaction force” who would be ready at a moment’s notice to occupy the Capitol if Trump invoked the Insurrection Act.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Less than three weeks before the election that could return him to the White House, Donald Trump again expressed solidarity with the violent domestic terrorists who assaulted the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, leaving 140 police officers injured and five dead.

“That was a day of love,” Trump said Wednesday evening as he repeated a number of lies about the day that saw the bloody culmination of his failed coup attempt. “Nothing done wrong at all. Nothing done wrong.”

Advertisement

Trump used the pronoun “we” as he described his mob. He called police officers and National Guard troops “the others.”

“He knew what he was doing on Jan. 6,” said Harry Dunn, a Capitol Police officer who was attacked while defending the building. “He lit the fuse that caused that day.”

An image of President Donald Trump is displayed on a screen as the House Jan. 6 committee conducts its final hearing in December 2022. On Wednesday, Trump referred to the violent insurrection as "a day of love." Kent Nishimura/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images

Trump’s rambling and in places contradictory answer at a Miami town hall hosted by Univision came in response to a question from a former supporter who asked if he would explain his actions and inactions on Jan. 6.

Advertisement

Trump started by saying he continues to disagree with then-Vice President Mike Pence’s decision to follow the law and the Constitution to certify Democrat Joe Biden’s 2020 election victory ― rather than falsely declare Trump the winner, as Trump had demanded Pence do.

Trump then said:

Very importantly, you had hundreds of thousands of people come to Washington. They didn’t come because of me. They came because of the election. They thought the election was a rigged election, and that’s why they came. Some of those people went down to the Capitol, I said, peacefully and patriotically, nothing done wrong at all. Nothing done wrong. And action was taken, strong action. Ashli Babbitt was killed. Nobody was killed. There were no guns down there. We didn’t have guns. The others had guns, but we didn’t have guns. And when I say we, these are people that walked down. This was a tiny percentage of the overall which nobody sees and nobody, nobody shows. But that was a day of love. From the standpoint of the millions, it’s like hundreds of thousands. It could have been the largest group I’ve ever spoken before. They asked me to speak. I went and I spoke, and I used the term peacefully and patriotically.

In those 164 words are five separate lies that, amid the exaggerated boasts about the size of his crowd, together create a fantastically false portrait of that day.

First, Trump’s followers did not organically show up in Washington, D.C., from around the country on the day of Congress’ ceremonial certification of the Electoral College vote. They came because, starting on Dec. 19, 2020, with a tweet asking them to come — “Be there, will be wild!” — Trump repeatedly encouraged attendance at his planned “big protest.”

Advertisement

And while Trump and his apologists and enablers have repeatedly said his supporters were not armed, that has been proven false. Militia groups that supported Trump’s coup attempt brought caches of guns for use that day if Trump had called for them to do so. The Secret Service on that morning learned that a number of his followers gathered in the area around the speech location had guns, including assault rifles.

According to testimony for the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack, when Trump was advised of this, he demanded that the Secret Service take down the magnetometers at the entrances to his rally because his supporters did not intend to harm him.

Trump’s claim that “nobody” died is also false. Babbitt was shot as she tried to climb through a broken-out window into a room through which members of Congress were being evacuated. His mob also injured more than 140 police officers — some gravely. One officer died within hours of the assault and four others died by suicide in the weeks and months to come.

Fourth, although Trump has frequently claimed that he had merely been “asked” to speak at the event, he was the one that made it happen in the first place.

“Trump knows what he did and who his confederates are,” said Mac Stipanovich, a longtime Republican consultant in Florida who on Wednesday publicly endorsed Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris for president. “Maintaining the fiction that he was an innocent bystander is becoming increasingly difficult as the strain of the campaign increases and his cognitive ability declines.”

Advertisement

Finally, while Trump may claim “nothing done wrong,” the Department of Justice has, to date, charged 1,532 of those involved in the attack on the Capitol with crimes. While domestic terrorism is defined in the United States Code as the use of violence or intimidation to affect government policy, there is no specific federal domestic terrorism charge. Hence, members of Trump’s mob were charged with offenses ranging from seditious conspiracy to trespassing, with 571 charged with assaulting or impeding a law enforcement officer. So far, 1,208 have been convicted at trial or pleaded guilty.

Trump himself has been indicted by federal prosecutors on charges based on the coup attempt. A Georgia grand jury also charged him for his attempt to overturn his election loss in that state.

Trump campaign officials did not respond to HuffPost queries about his new comments and whether he still plans to pardon his followers who have been convicted of assaulting police officers, as he has repeatedly promised.

Trump rarely gets asked about his coup attempt anymore because he has largely stopped doing interviews with anyone other than supporters who want to see him elected.

In recent days, for example, Trump has backed out of interviews with CBS’s “60 Minutes,” CNBC and NBC.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

A few days after Elon Musk first offered to buy what was then called Twitter and is now X, he wrote that the website “must be politically neutral” in order to deserve the public’s trust — “which effectively means upsetting the far right and the far left equally.”

Two years later, with a significant presidential election fast approaching, Musk has thrown neutrality out the window and spent millions to boost former President Donald Trump’s campaign, raising concerns that he’ll use the platform to help Trump as well.

Advertisement

And if Trump loses and once again contests the election result, Musk could wield a massive social media platform weaponized to boost conspiracy theories about the November vote. X did not respond to HuffPost questions for this story.

Earlier this year, Musk said he wasn’t donating money to either presidential candidate. In July, he denied a Wall Street Journal report that Musk said he planned on donating “around $45 million a month” to a super PAC he helped create, America PAC, that has aggressively supported Trump’s campaign in key states throughout the country.

On Tuesday, however, the first federal campaign finance records were published since the Journal’s report – showing Musk’s seven donations to the PAC between July 3 and Sept. 5. In total, the records show Musk has given just under $75 million to the PAC.

Musk’s donations grew over time, starting in $5 million increments in July (meaning he’d given $10 million to the PAC before the Journal story published) and culminating in a single $30 million donation on Sept. 5. The America PAC money will be used to pay hourly wages for door-to-door canvassers, and for direct mail and advertisements. In addition to spending heavily on the presidential race and reportedly becoming a crucial part of Trump’s ground game, the super PAC is also backing Republicans in several key congressional districts.

Advertisement

Like Musk himself, the PAC has resorted to outrageous rhetoric to boost Trump. One America PAC ad on X refers to an undefined “they,” an apparent reference to Donald Trump’s political enemies collectively, with a narrator saying, “They tried to kick Trump off your ballot. They even tried to end his campaign and take him out for good.” During that dialogue, pictures of Vice President Kamala Harris and then a bloodied Trump at his first Butler, Pennsylvania, rally flash on screen. The ad closes with the written text, “Vote for President Trump like your life depends on it...”

“If you sit this election out, Kamala and the crazies will win,” another America PAC ad declares. “You will be stuck with higher costs and more illegals invading our country.”

Musk has reportedly also used the levers of power at X to help the pro-Trump PAC.

Earlier this month, Musk seized the “@America” username from a longtime user of the website who in the past had criticized both Musk and Trump, journalist Matt Binder reported. Musk had previously done the same with the “@X” account — but this time, the seizure had nothing to do with the company’s interests, Binder observed. It was about helping Musk’s political organization help Trump.

Now, Musk’s PAC is effectively paying for information about energized right-leaning voters in key swing states. A pro-First and Second Amendment petition on the America PAC website promises a $47 reward for every new referral. The offer’s fine print says it only applies to referrers and registered voters in seven swing states.

As HuffPost reported Tuesday, Musk has also funded one of the most cynical super PACs of the election cycle, Future Coalition PAC.

Advertisement

In areas of Michigan with large numbers of Muslim and Arab voters, the group is running advertisements highlighting Harris’ support for Israel, and sending mailers saying she “leans on Jewish husband Doug Emhoff to advise on high-level pro-Israel policies.” At the same time, it’s also running ads targeted at Jewish voters in Pennsylvania with dialogue like, “Why did Harris show sympathy for college protesters who are rabidly antisemitic?”

Tesla CEO Elon Musk (R) joins former President and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump during a campaign rally at site of his first assassination attempt in Butler, Pennsylvania, on Oct. 5. JIM WATSON via Getty Images

Musk’s influence goes well beyond his money. His ownership of X provides a powerful platform for him to amplify certain perspectives and minimize others.

He has amplified himself most of all: Musk is the most-followed account on X, and on top of that, in response to Musk’s own demands, X engineers have artificially boosted the audience for his posts in the past, the Platformer newsletter reported last year. That means Musk isn’t just a power X user, but a tone-setter for the entire website.

In an August analysis of tens of thousands of Musk tweets, the Wall Street Journal showed that 2024 had been an unusually prolific posting year for Musk — and an unusually political one. In July, when Musk formally endorsed Trump’s candidacy, his posts mentioning Trump or President Joe Biden skyrocketed, the Journal showed.

Advertisement

As opposed to other tech CEOs, who generally keep their politics to back rooms — or to themselves — Musk has used his platform to push Trump talking points daily. This necessarily means lying for Trump, who has promised Musk a government job if he wins.

Numerous analyses of Musk’s posts show the pattern: One analysis of Musk’s posts from January through July 30 found that false or misleading claims on election-related posts from him had generated 1.2 billion views. None of the posts had earned a “Community Note” fact-checking label, the analysis from the Center for Countering Digital Hate, which Musk has unsuccessfully sued in the past, noted.

And over a five-day period just last month, more than half of Musk’s posts were focused on politics, and nearly a third of his posts were “false, misleading or missing vital context,” The New York Times reported.

Some posts are blatant: A few days after Biden dropped his reelection bid in July, for example, Musk shared a fake political advertisement — he didn’t acknowledge it was satire until later — that featured a realistic-sounding AI-generated Harris voice. The “Harris” voice called herself “the ultimate diversity hire” and a “deep state puppet” who did not “know the first thing about running the country.” Last month, Musk posted an AI-generated image of Harris wearing a hammer-and-sickle hat and a red military-style coat, lying that “Kamala vows to be a communist dictator on day one.” CNN noted the image “appeared to violate X’s policy on manipulated content.” But it remains unlabeled and visible on Musk’s account.

“It’s staggering hypocrisy,” one unnamed former Twitter employee told Wired in August, referring to Musk’s partisan behavior. “Musk is smart enough to know social media is media, and it’s a way to control the narrative.” An unnamed former member of the site’s policy team added, “He has a very obvious political agenda.”

Advertisement

Then there are the day-to-day lies and propaganda.

Musk has referred to electronic voting machines and mail voting as “too risky,” echoing Trump’s own claims that those methods are used for widespread voter fraud — even though this is false, and even though Musk himself has voted by mail in the past, just like Trump has.

And Musk has also repeatedly shared “Great Replacement Theory”-style lies that Democrats are “importing” “vast numbers” of voters, a reference to people who cross the border without authorization and are allowed — pursuant to U.S. law – to stay in the country as their asylum cases proceed through the courts. He has separately, falsely, said Democrats are “fast-tracking them to citizenship.” Last month, responding to an X user who said Democrats were doing everything they can to cheat in the swing states, Musk wrote, “absolutely.”

Some of his false posts have a staggering reach.

In April, before he endorsed Trump, Musk amplified a wildly false claim that millions of new voters had registered without providing proof of citizenship. Musk’s post has been viewed nearly 60 million times, according to X’s public-facing metrics, and the post he amplified has millions more views than that. The claim was “extremely false. 2 minutes of research required,” Stephen Richer, the Republican recorder of Maricopa County, Arizona, told Musk.

Not only does it take years to become a citizen, criminal voting by noncitizens is almost non-existent. More broadly, naturalized citizens are not a political monolith — as Musk himself, a Trump supporter and immigrant who became a U.S. citizen in 2002, ought to know. August polling from the National Partnership for New Americans, which surveyed 2,678 naturalized citizens who are registered to vote, found that 43.3% of respondents considered themselves Democrats, 30.3% considered themselves Republicans, and 26.3% considered themselves independents.

Other false posts from Musk echo Trump’s campaign talking points, including about Haitian immigrants. Musk has even shared a projected 2024 Electoral College map shared by a well-known fake news organization that claimed, “according to Nate Silver,” that Trump was projected to win the Electoral College in a blowout. Silver, the election forecaster who has in reality called the race a “toss-up,” did not actually make the map, CNN reported.

Advertisement

Katie Harbath, the former public policy director at Facebook, said Musk’s own tweets have been the primary way he’s used X to help Trump — in addition to the two-hour interview Musk hosted with Trump in August.

“It’s almost a little bit less about using the Twitter platform itself, and more about Musk using his own cult of personality, and his own following,” Harbath said.

That comes with perils for the next few weeks: Though Musk has said he will accept the results of the election, it doesn’t seem far-fetched to worry that Musk could manipulate his platform even more in Trump’s favor in the event of a contested election result, or a Trump loss that Trump refuses to accept.

“I don’t think Musk is going to persuade anybody to vote one way or the other,” Harbath said. “But I am worried about him persuading people to shift from just being online to actually taking physical action and going somewhere,” including for potentially violent protests in the event of a contested election.

“I am worried about him persuading people to shift from just being online to actually taking physical action.” - Katie Harbath, former public policy director at Facebook

Advertisement

There’s an open question hanging over the next few weeks — will Musk attempt to use X to help Trump, or hurt Harris, by changing the how political material is displayed or promoted on the app?

From the beginning of his X ownership, Musk has replatformed far-right accounts that had previously been banned, including white supremacists and conspiracy theorists. His move to offer blue “verified” checkmarks for sale — and with little actual verification — when the checks were previously used to designate reliable sources in media and government has led to a tsunami of mis- and disinformation about serious issues, like the wars in Gaza and Ukraine.

Musk has cast himself as a free speech warrior — but X under his management has actually agreed to more governmental requests to remove or restrict certain content than Twitter did under previous management, the Washington Post reported last month. Musk’s X has also suspended adversarial reporters and algorithmically marginalized its corporate competitors.

And there are some indications he’s suspended users for political reasons.

“He’s clearly tipping the scales in this election in favor of Trump,” Mike Nellis, a political consultant and Harris supporter, told HuffPost.

Nellis helped start “White Dudes for Harris,” or @dudes4harris, which was briefly suspended by the X on the same day it hosted a star-studded Zoom call that reportedly raised millions for Harris’ presidential campaign.

Advertisement

The stated offense, which cited a “user report” for “violating our rules against evading suspension,” didn’t make sense to Nellis, who said he’d never had any accounts suspended from the platform before. He said he wasn’t sure if Musk had specifically been involved in suspending his account, but the X owner did snark the White Dudes for Harris fundraising call on the same night, saying of the actor Mark Hamill’s remarks during the Zoom event, “his brain has been marinating in Kool-Aid for a long time.”

Then, just days ago, the independent journalist Ken Klippenstein was suspended from the platform for allegedly “violating our rules on posting unredacted private personal information,” X said, the result of Klippenstein publishing an internal Trump campaign dossier of information about Republican vice presidential candidate Sen. JD Vance (R-Ohio).

Klippenstein argued he never shared any of Vance’s private information — he just linked to a leaked dossier that included some of it, including a home address and part of a Social Security number. Klippenstein argued the campaign had pulled the information from publicly available sources. Nonetheless, he changed out the document embedded in the story, replacing it with a version that redacted the supposed personal information. Still, he remained suspended.

Klippenstein’s account was restored to X several days later, however — right after The New York Times reported that the Trump campaign had “connected with X to prevent the circulation of links to the material on the platform,” unnamed people with knowledge of the events told the paper. CNN separately reported on “a conversation with X officials about the hacked materials before Klippenstein was banned and links to his newsletter were blocked,” citing a person familiar with the matter.

Even now, with Klippenstein’s account restored and the supposed personal information in the dossier redacted, users are unable to publish a link to his dossier story on X. Klippenstein’s original post linking to the story appears to still be the only link to it on the whole website.

Advertisement

In fairness, Facebook and other sites have also limited circulation on Klippenstein’s story — but none have taken the supposed “pro-free speech” stance that Musk has claimed as his own. Facebook blocked the link for allegedly containing “hacked sources or content leaked as part of a foreign government operation to influence US elections.” (The dossier is believed to have been hacked by an Iranian actor.) Meta’s rationale “is not about the publication of personal information,” a spokesperson for the company told HuffPost.

The apparent X ban on posting the link to Klippenstein’s reporting stands in stark contrast to Musk’s own stated opposition to Twitter’s previous management’s limiting circulation of a 2020 New York Post story about Hunter Biden’s old laptop.

Several outlets have also noted that on the day Biden dropped out of the presidential race and endorsed Harris for the presidency, multiple X users reported they were unable to follow the Harris campaign account — with a message telling them “You are unable to follow more people at this time.” House Judiciary Committee Ranking Member Jerry Nadler (D-N.Y.) referred to the glitches as “apparent censorship.” It’s possible this was an example of an innocent error, caused by the sudden spike in the Harris account’s followers.

Harbath warned generally against assigning political motivations to Musk where simple technical glitches could explain various incidents. But she also pointed out that the public simply doesn’t know if Musk has weighed in on various suspensions or promoted certain ideological material — or whether he might do that in the days before or after Election Day.

“We just don’t know what changes he’s asked X to make,” she said, noting the walls Musk built around Twitter’s API, which was previously easily accessible to researchers looking into how X works. “There’s no way to actually independently verify what he is or is not doing with the platform in order to help Trump.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

MILWAUKEE (AP) — With three weeks left in the presidential campaign, Democrat Kamala Harris is spending most of her days trying to shore up support in the “blue wall” states of Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin as she tries to avoid a repeat of Hillary Clinton’s collapse there eight years ago.

The vice president campaigned at a hockey rink on Monday in Erie, Pennsylvania, where she denounced Republican candidate Donald Trump as “unhinged.” She visited an art gallery in Detroit with actors Don Cheadle, Delroy Lindo and Cornelius Smith. Jr. on Tuesday, then recorded a radio town hall with Charlamagne tha God.

Advertisement

On Wednesday, Harris was back in Pennsylvania to stress allegiance to the Constitution as she stood just steps from the banks of the Delaware River, where George Washington crossed with his troops in a pivotal moment of the Revolutionary War.

Her pace doesn’t let up for the rest of the week. Harris is expected to hold three events in Wisconsin on Thursday, including a meet-and-greet with students at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and three more in Michigan on Friday. She then campaigns in Detroit on Saturday.

A loss anywhere in the “blue wall,” a name that reflects the region’s traditional Democratic leaning, could doom Harris’ path to the presidency.

“You don’t take those states for granted. And she’s not,” said Joel Benenson, a Democratic pollster.

He previously served as chief strategist for Clinton, whose campaign was so overconfident that it stopped conducting its own polls in Midwest battlegrounds as the election approached.

Advertisement

“We’ve got a painful lesson in 2016 when we didn’t go to the ‘blue wall’ states, and we lost,” Benenson said.

Harris’ campaign emphasized that she’s not giving up on Sun Belt battlegrounds like North Carolina, Georgia, Arizona and Nevada. The vice president was in North Carolina over the weekend and she’s expected to be back in Georgia on Sunday.

But any candidate’s most precious resource is time, and Harris’ schedule reflects the consensus about her most likely shot at winning the White House.

“It’s not the only path, but it’s the easiest path to victory,” said Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.

She added, “If you can’t win Pennsylvania or Michigan, do you really think you can win Georgia or North Carolina?”

Advertisement

Pennsylvania and Michigan are Harris’ most popular destinations since Labor Day, with eight stops in each state, according to an Associated Press tracking of candidates’ public events.

Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris poses for a photo as she visits Norwest Gallery of Art in Detroit, on Oct. 15, 2024. AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin

At Harris’ event in Washington Crossing on Wednesday, one voter said Democrats had discovered the cost of complacency the hard way.

“In 2016, we thought we had it, you know, we thought we were okay,” said Melanie Woods, a retired school principal who came all the way from Brooklyn. “And I don’t think you can ever take anything for granted any more.”

Dan Kanninen, the Harris campaign’s battleground states director, said the vice president has “multiple pathways” to win.

Advertisement

“All seven battleground states are in play, and we know each will be incredibly close,” he said. “That is why we will continue to engage and mobilize voters aggressively across all these states until Election Day.”

During her campaign travels, Harris is trying to pick strategic areas to talk about key policies, such as promoting auto jobs and union membership in Detroit and going to Douglas, Arizona to unveil plans to tighten rules for immigrants seeking asylum at the U.S.-Mexico border after she walked along the towering wall separating the two countries.

The campaign is also increasingly relying on large organizational networks in key states, including coordinated offices with state Democratic parties, to fill in the gaps when Harris isn’t there. It’s deploying key surrogates — most notably Harris’ running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz — to lessen the impact of choosing to travel to one part of the country versus the other.

Democrats have other benefits, too. There’s a deep bench of high-profile politicians who are united behind Harris, including former President Barack Obama, who has been making campaign stops on her behalf. And there’s a campaign war chest larger than Trump’s, allowing Harris to keep up the pressure with advertising and expansive get-out-the-vote efforts.

Democrats’ electoral odds have ebbed and flowed during this tumultuous election year. President Joe Biden had faced a dwindling path to reelection, with some purple states sliding out of reach. But when he dropped out of the race in July, Harris’ team emphasized her potentially broader geographic appeal.

Advertisement

“Vice President Harris enters a tight race, but it is clear that she can bring together a coalition of voters to keep a wide set of states in play,” Campaign Chair Jen O’Malley Dillon wrote in a memo in late July.

But that doesn’t mean that some states aren’t more important than others.

“You win Pennsylvania, and you’re the next president,” Sen. John Fetterman said at Harris’ rally in Erie.

Trump’s travel is less tightly focused than Harris’ this week. He was in Pennsylvania on Monday, Illinois and Georgia on Tuesday and Florida on Wednesday.

He attends the Al Smith charity dinner in New York on Thursday and returns to Detroit on Friday

His previous visit there generated backlash because he criticized the city, which is rebounding after years of financial problems.

“Our whole country will end up being like Detroit if she’s your president,” Trump said during a speech to the Detroit Economic Club.

Advertisement

Tommey Walker, founder and owner of the clothing company Detroit vs. Everybody, derided Trump for disparaging his city while introducing Harris at an event on Tuesday.

“Now it’s Detroit versus Donald Trump,” Walker proclaimed.

Harris, by contrast, talked about the city in reverent tones. She recalled making friends with students from Detroit while attending Howard University.

“I just feel a kindred spirit whenever I come to Detroit,” Harris said.

___
CNN —

An independent panel of former law enforcement officials appointed under Department of Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas recommended a complete overhaul of Secret Service leadership after reviewing the agency’s security failures that led to the near assassination of Donald Trump in Pennsylvania this summer.

In one of the most scathing reviews of the agency to date, the panel lambasted the Secret Service for its culture of “do more with less” and the general lack of “critical thinking” that permeated agents during and in the lead up to the Butler rally where Trump was shot and one rallygoer was killed.

“The Secret Service has become bureaucratic, complacent, and static even though risks have multiplied and technology has evolved,” the panel wrote in its report released Wednesday.

The panel – led by Mark Filip, deputy attorney general under President George W. Bush; Janet Napolitano, the secretary of Homeland Security under President Barack Obama; and others – recommended leadership in the agency be replaced with outside individuals who could change the culture of the Secret Service, including the “present sense of complacency within the Service.”

“Many of the issues that the Panel has identified throughout this report, particularly regarding the Panel’s ‘deeper concerns,’ are ultimately attributable, directly or indirectly, to the Service’s culture. A refreshment of leadership, with new perspectives, will contribute to the Service’s resolution of those issues,” the panel wrote.

The agency is currently led by acting Director Ronald Rowe, who – though not named directly in the report’s recommendation for leadership change – comes from inside the ranks of the agency and was appointed after Director Kimberly Cheatle resigned in the wake of the near assassination.

In a call with reporters Thursday morning, one member of the panel said the recommendations aren’t meant to be implemented immediately.

“I don’t think anybody was intending that you would fire acting director Rowe and the leadership team now. It wouldn’t be in the country’s interest or the service’s interest. That is one of the longer-term recommendations,” the member said.

Then-US Secret Service Director Kimberly Cheatle enters a House of Representatives Oversight Committee hearing on the security lapses that allowed an attempted assassination of former President Donald Trump, on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC, on July 22, 2024. Kevin Mohatt/REUTERS/REUTERS

US Secret Service acting Director Ronald Rowe leaves after holding a press conference in Washington, DC, on September 20, 2024. Ben Curtis/Pool/AFP/Getty Images

In a statement Thursday after the report was issued, Rowe said he “remains steadfast” and said the agency has already “significantly improved” many facets flagged in the report.

The report heavily criticized the agency for failing to properly secure the Butler rally site, including by not establishing line-of-sight blockades, not securing the group of buildings the shooter accessed, not responding to reports of the shooter as a suspicious person over an hour before Trump was shot, and a myriad of other failures from the agency and local law enforcement.

These failures, the panel said, were part of a lack of critical thinking among Secret Service personnel responsible for security that day.

Another recommendation by the panel included the need for the agency to shed some of its other responsibilities not related to security, including its investigative work, some of which focuses on financial crimes the agency was established to combat.

“The Panel expresses extreme skepticism that many of the Service’s non-protective (investigative) missions meaningfully contribute to the Service’s protective capability and is concerned that they may materially distract from it,” the report says.

Mayorkas said he would review the panel’s finding but added in a statement he has “the utmost confidence in the men and women of the United States Secret Service” and commended Rowe “for his leadership and for proactively undertaking security enhancements, including those informed by the Secret Service’s Internal Mission Assurance Review.”

The panel also noted the Secret Service’s failure to adequately ramp up Trump’s security after learning of an assassination threat from “a foreign state actor” to the former president, as well as his already high-profile status as a former president and current Republican front-runner for the 2024 election. CNN previously reported that authorities had obtained intelligence about a plot by Iran to assassinate Trump in the weeks before the attempted assassination of the former president at a campaign rally in Pennsylvania in July.

Other agency failures identified in the report included a lack of experience among those who led the site security for the rally that day.

The Butler, Pennsylvania campaign rally site is empty and littered with debris on July 13, 2024. Evan Vucci/AP

“The site agent assigned by the Trump detail to coordinate with the Pittsburgh field office to conduct site advance work and site security planning for the Butler rally only graduated from the Service’s academy in 2020,” the panel noted, “had only been on the Trump detail since 2023, and had engaged in minimal previous site advance work or site security planning and certainly nothing to the level of the July 13 Butler rally.”

The panel also addressed communication failures during the Butler rally between the Secret Service and local law enforcement officers who reported the shooter’s movements and suspicious activities – like looking at the stage with a range finder – throughout the day.

The panel noted that while the Secret Service says it is working on creating a more integrated communications system, the federal government has been aware of and created remedies for these issues, which were recognized decades ago in the wake of the September 11 terror attacks.

While the panel praised agents for acting to protect Trump after he was shot and quickly taking out the shooter, the report added that “bravery and selflessness alone, no matter how honorable, are insufficient to discharge the Secret Service’s no-fail protective mission.”
CNN —

More than a dozen Republicans who were “fake electors” in 2020, including several facing criminal charges, are serving as former President Donald Trump’s official electors in battleground states this year, according to a CNN survey.

Another 16 GOP electors from these states are election deniers who say President Joe Biden’s victory in 2020 was fraudulent. Combined, these election deniers and 2020 fake electors represent more than a third of the 82 electors picked this year to support Trump in the seven states where he attempted to overturn the results in 2020.

The involvement of these Republican activists in the Electoral College process this year, especially in critical battlegrounds like Pennsylvania and Michigan, could lead to post-election chaos if Trump is defeated and they try again to subvert the will of the voters.

Their participation also highlights how a huge part of the Republican Party continues to fully embrace Trump’s election denialism

“Those who participate in election fraud should be held accountable, not given another bite at the apple,” said Lindsey Miller, research director at Informing Democracy, a nonprofit that works to safeguard the vote-counting and election certification process.

Most of the fake electors and election deniers did not respond to CNN’s request for comment.

In 2020, the Republicans now known as “fake electors” were originally tapped before the election to serve as Trump’s real electors from those states – if he won. But after he lost, at the behest of the Trump campaign, they signed phony certificates falsely proclaiming that he won their states.

Trump then tried to use those certificates to stay in power. By pressuring then-Vice President Mike Pence to reject Biden’s electors and recognize the fake GOP electors while Pence presided over the Electoral College certification in Congress on January 6, 2021, Trump hoped to throw the issue back to the states in a bid to remain in the White House.

A few things have changed that would make it even harder for Trump to attempt to certify his electors from states he lost.

For starters, his 2024 opponent, Vice President Kamala Harris, will preside over the certification process in January 2025. As Pence explained in 2021, the role of the vice president is entirely ceremonial. Congress passed reforms in 2022 to make that crystal clear.

That new law also makes it harder for lawmakers to raise objections to a state’s electors by increasing the threshold for the number of House and Senate members required to do so. Further, Trump isn’t the sitting president, so he can’t try to weaponize the Justice Department to aid his election subversion efforts like he did in 2020.

Michigan

Out of the seven states Trump targeted in 2020, Michigan’s slate of Republican electors for 2024 has – by far – the largest share of election deniers and 2020 fake electors.

Six of the 15 Republican electors from the Wolverine State this year were fake electors in 2020 and are facing charges for their involvement in the scheme. (They all pleaded not guilty.) And another six have falsely claimed that the 2020 election was fraudulent.

Shortly before the 2024 slate of electors was picked at the state party convention in August, Michigan GOP chairman Pete Hoekstra defended the involvement of the six fake electors from 2020, saying, “I still believe they have their day in court.”

They are Meshawn Maddock and Marian Sheridan, former Michigan GOP officials; John Haggard and Timothy King, who were part of a frivolous election lawsuit in 2020; Amy Facchinello, who has posted QAnon material online; and dairy farmer Hank Choate.

Supporters of then-President Donald Trump gather outside of Michigan’s State Capitol building in Lansing on Wednesday, January 6, 2021. Ryan Garza/Detroit Free Press/USA Today Network/Imagn Images

Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel, a Democrat, was the first prosecutor in the country to charge any 2020 fake electors. They were charged in August 2023, and an investigator testified earlier this year that Trump is an unindicted co-conspirator.

Another 2024 Michigan elector, Jim Tokarski, told the Detroit News last year that the 2020 election was “stolen,” and said Trump “deserves to have his next term in office.”

Linda Glisman, another GOP elector this year, previously claimed the 2020 election was “filled with cheating,” with “election fraud on a grand scale,” according to a questionnaire she filled out in 2022 during an unsuccessful statehouse campaign. She also said the Trump supporters who went to the US Capitol on January 6, 2021, were “patriots.”

Andrew Sebolt said in a similar questionnaire that the 2020 election was rigged. He also used the phrase “plandemic,” a term for a grab bag of Covid-19 conspiracy theories.

Pennsylvania

More than a third of Pennsylvania’s 19 Republican electors this year are either election deniers or signed the phony certificates in 2020.

Five of the 2020 fake electors from the state were tapped to serve as 2024 electors.

The most prominent of the five is Bill Bachenberg, a wealthy Republican donor who is the most prominent of the group, has been linked to efforts in at least three states to breach election systems after the 2020 election in hopes of proving Trump’s conspiracy theories about widespread fraud. He is also a board member of the National Rifle Association, which endorsed Trump.

Unlike most other states Trump targeted in 2020 with fake electors, the certificates these Pennsylvania Republicans signed said they were only meeting in case a “non-appealable court order” later determined Trump actually won. This was added after some GOP electors raised last-minute concerns over the legality of the plan. Thanks to this hedged language, the 2020 fake electors in Pennsylvania weren’t charged.

At least two more of Pennsylvania’s GOP elector slate this year are election deniers, according to CNN’s analysis of their previous public statements and voting records.

Carla Sands, the US ambassador to Denmark under Trump, who is a 2024 elector, has said, “the election of 2020 was stolen” and falsely claimed her 2020 mail-in ballot wasn’t counted. And former Rep. Fred Keller backed a lawsuit to overturn the results from four states Trump lost and voted to throw out Pennsylvania’s legitimate Democratic electors on January 6, 2021.

Another elector, Samuel “Jim” Worthington, previously posted that he had “no doubt” the 2020 election was “inaccurate and corrupted,” and attended Trump’s fiery Ellipse rally on January 6, 2021. But he told CNN he never went to the Capitol that day, doesn’t see himself as an election denier, and now accepts Biden as the legitimate president.

Nevada

Two of Nevada’s electors this year were fake electors from 2020.

They are Nevada GOP chairman Michael McDonald and Jesse Law, chairman of the Clark County GOP, which is home to most of the state’s voters and includes Las Vegas.

Nevada GOP chair and 2020 'fake elector' Michael McDonald, right, shakes hands with former President Donald Trump at a campaign event in January in Las Vegas. John Locher/AP/File

Both were indicted last year in connection with the 2020 fake electors plot, but a judge threw out the charges in June because they were not filed in the proper jurisdiction. Nevada’s Democratic attorney general, who brought the case, is appealing that decision.

The 2024 slate also includes Washoe County GOP chairman Bruce Parks, dubbed a “leading voice” in Nevada election denialism by the investigative outlet ProPublica. Parks led the Washoe GOP chapter when it rejected Biden’s 2020 win and called him “acting president.” Parks regularly touts false claims of mass voter fraud.

Georgia

At least five of Georgia’s 16 Republican electors this year are election deniers, have embraced Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 results, or defended the fake electors.

The Washington Post called Georgia GOP Treasurer Caroline Jeffords “among the state’s leading election deniers” last year, citing her involvement in litigation against Fulton County alleging that counterfeit ballots were used in the 2020 election.

Cobb County GOP chair Salleigh Grubbs previously told CNN that she doesn’t believe the 2020 election results from her county. She submitted the controversial proposal that the Trump-aligned Georgia State Election Board approved in August that gave local officials more power to investigate ballots and possibly delay certifying the final results.

Suzi Voyles, assistant secretary for the Georgia Republican Party and a self-proclaimed “election expert,” was fired by Fulton County as a poll worker after raising baseless concerns about ballot-counting procedures in 2020 (investigators found no evidence supporting her allegations). On her X account, Voyles has tweeted out links to far-right outlets suggesting that the 2020 election was “one of the most lawless in US history.”

In a NPR interview last month, Georgia Republican Party chair Josh McKoon, said Trump “lawfully contest(ed)” the 2020 results in Georgia and refused to say outright that Trump lost the state. (Trump is facing Georgia state charges over his actions in 2020).

Gwinnett County GOP official Laurie McClain shared a Facebook post in 2023 expressing solidarity with the 2020 fake electors, whom she called “innocent patriots.” The post led to a site likening the “false media narrative” about the electors to the Loch Ness Monster.

“The suggestion that anything these electors did was in any way criminal and worthy of the millions of dollars that have been spent to fight this frivolous indictment is, in fact, less credible than claims of a Bigfoot sighting,” McClain told CNN in an email, referring to the state charges against three Georgia Republicans who were 2020 fake electors.

Wisconsin

To settle a civil lawsuit brought by Wisconsin’s real 2020 Democratic electors, the state’s fake GOP electors from 2020 agreed to stay out of the 2024 election process.

Jeff Mandell, general counsel of Law Forward, which sued the GOP electors, said the goal of the settlement was “to fully unpack what had happened and how and who was involved, to make sure that there was accountability for those who were involved, and to make sure that there was deterrence, so that nothing like this could happen again.”

The slate of GOP electors for 2024 does include at least one 2020 election denier.

State Rep. Angie Sapik claimed that China had “rigged” the 2020 election and tweeted“Rage on, Patriots!” during the January 6, 2021, insurrection according to now-deleted social media posts reported by Wisconsin Watch, a nonpartisan investigative outlet.

Recount observers watch ballots during a Milwaukee hand recount of Presidential votes at the Wisconsin Center on November 20. Nam Y. Huh/AP/File

More recently, Sapik has raised concerns about a ballot mistake in Madison that sent duplicate ballots to up to 2,000 voters last month. Election officials repeatedly said there is no way the duplicates would be counted, but some Wisconsin Republicans, including Sapik, used the error to question the legitimacy of the 2024 election. She posted on Facebook, “this is not democracy” and accused election officials of “lying to the public.”

In an email to CNN, Sapik said her comment that “this is not democracy” was a reaction to “witnessing official press releases change” from Madison election officials as they explained the duplicate ballots – which she conceded was “indeed a mistake.” She did not answer questions about her tweets regarding January 6 and the 2020 results.

New Mexico

New Mexico wasn’t a presidential battleground in 2020 – and isn’t expected to be competitive this year either – but was still the site of a fake GOP elector slate in 2020.

With its small population, New Mexico only has five electoral votes. Debbie Maestas is the only one of the 2020 fake electors who was picked by the state Republican Party to serve as a presidential elector in 2024. She ran the New Mexico GOP from 2014 to 2016 and was also a delegate for the state in the 2016 Republican National Convention.

Prosecutors have said none of New Mexico’s fake electors will face charges.

New Mexico Attorney General Raúl Torrez, a Democrat, has said they weren’t prosecuted because – like Pennsylvania – they hedged the language in their phony certificate to make clear they were only acting as electors-in-waiting in case Trump won any of his election lawsuits.

Arizona

There is at least one avid election denier among Arizona’s 11 GOP electors this year:

Arizona GOP chairwoman Gina Swoboda, who heads the Voter Reference Foundation, which is widely known for its unfounded claims of having evidence of fraud from 2020.

In a local TV interview last month, Swoboda claimed the 2020 election “was stolen fair and square” from Trump because “the rules were changed in the middle of the game.”

CNN’s Ethan Cohen, Jason Morris, Scott Glover and Veronica Stracqualursi contributed to this report
In Southeastern Europe, the last three months of 2024 are packed with political showdowns that will determine the region's future. Moldovans have the chance to take two big steps towards the European Union, Bulgarians have another chance to resolve their government crisis, and Romanians face a rather grim array of presidential candidates.

Moldova at a historic crossroads

The next election in Southeastern Europe is the presidential election in Moldova. They will be held on 20 October alongside an equally important referendum on EU accession. In the race for the presidential seat, the current liberal and pro-European president Maia Sandu is the favourite to win with over 36% of the total vote, according to a recent poll conducted by the Aspen Institute Romania in partnership with the Moldovan Foreign Policy Association and the anti-disinformation community Watchdog.md.

As Moldovan investigative newspaper Ziarul de Gardă reported, Maia Sandu’s objectives for the next four years revolve around local development, healthcare investments, education, and peace. But, that’s not all. In September, Maia Sandu dismissed six judges and donated a €25.000 prize she received to repair a historic church, showing her apparent support for justice and religion. Yet, she’s not the only one that uses religion to win votes. Acting in favour of churches is one of the main ways in which Moscow influences elections in Moldova. Not long ago, Ziarul de Gardă published a video showing priests from the Metropolitanate of Moldova, charted under the Russian Orthodox Church, waiting at the Chișinău International Airport to fly to Moscow.

The Metropolitanate of Moldova responded with a press release saying their priests travel to Russia for spiritual, not political reasons. Fortunately for Sandu and pro-Europeans, the Russophile presidential candidate Alexandr Stoianoglo is predicted to earn only around 10% of the total votes. In an attempt to garner more votes for Stoianoglo, the leader of the Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova and Moldova’s former president Igor Dodon warned that Maia Sandu’s reelection is set to trigger “queer propaganda” in schools and “LGBT quotas” among the workers in state institutions. Dodon also called the EU referendum a “tool of trickery”, according to Ziarul de Gardă.

The conundrum of Bulgaria’s electoral system

Bulgaria is facing its seventh round of early parliamentary elections since 2021. This is because Bulgarian politicians failed to form a government after the last elections in June 2024. Now, another failure to form a majority could trigger a change in the electoral system.

Interesting article? It was made possible by Voxeurop’s community. High-quality reporting and translation comes at a cost. To continue producing independent journalism, we need your support. or Donate

The run-up to the elections, scheduled for 27 October, is already heating up. According to the Bulgarian news platform Mediapool, leader Kiril Petkov stated that if the DPS (Movement for Rights and Freedoms; centrist, runner-up in the June elections) enters parliament, his own centrist PP-DB coalition won’t cooperate with them. According to Petkov, DPS leader Delyan Peevski has made a habit of undermining anti-corruption reforms when they reach critical points. Just recently, Nikolai Marchenko of the Bulgarian investigative newspaper Bivol quoted the leader of the BOEC anti-corruption movement, Georgi Georgiev, as saying that “Peevski stole 50 million leva (about 25 million euro)” from a Bulgarian bank.

Boyko Borisov, the leader of the GERB-SDS coalition (which came first in the June elections with 24% of the vote), recently proposed changing Bulgaria's electoral system to avoid political deadlock. His idea is to switch to a model with a majority bonus. “Why do we stand like lambs, waiting and blaming the people and the low voter turnout? We should offer them something that will motivate them – a proportional-majoritarian vote. There will be more candidates, more individuals will come forward”, he suggested per Mediapool.

Is Romania’s future president a sure disaster?

Romania is set to have presidential elections on 24 November and parliamentary elections on 1 December. Adrian Mihălțianu, the editorial director of the Romanian news platform PressOne, says Romanians face a disastrous choice for the presidency: the candidates are imposters, poorly educated people or people loyal to Western allies with a level of knowledge “dangerously close to zero”.

Read also

Context | 01 October | RO

A recent joint investigation revealed that Rareș Mănescu, a key figure in Mircea Geoană's campaign for Romania’s presidency, has business ties with Russian propagandist Aleksei Kozlov. Kozlov, under the alias Alex Krepchinsky, has promoted pro-Russian content and recruited Ukrainian activists. Kozlov is also linked to Andrei Batin, a mercenary who fought for Russia in Donbas. Although Geoană denied knowledge of Mănescu’s connections, evidence suggests his campaign started before officially leaving his NATO Deputy Secretary General position, raising concerns about potential conflicts of interest.

Andrei Udișteanu | Recorder | 5 September | RO

Liberal politician Nicolae Ciucă has been praised as “the only Romanian commander to lead in a real battle since World War II”, a claim that bolstered his political career, including his appointment as Romania's prime minister and potential presidential candidate. His reputation stems from his leadership of the Romanian “Red Scorpions” battalion in Iraq in 2004. To verify his military record, Recorder interviewed Italian generals and Romanian soldiers involved in the mission, as well as reviewing press archives from that period. The findings showed that Ciucă’s story was rather a myth.

Ioana Ion | Adevărul | 5 October | EN

The Constitutional Court of Romania (CCR) excluded Diana Șoșoacă, the SOS Romania party (far right, pro-Russia) representative, from the 2024 presidential race without the possibility of appeal. Șoșoacă, who was also sanctioned in the European Parliament for inappropriate behaviour, reacted by blaming external influences and conspiratorially claiming Jewish interference.
If you’ve ever purchased anything online, you have likely noticed that it’s much easier to sign up for a subscription service than cancel one.

If I want to cancel my New York Times subscription, for example, I can call a service representative, chat online with a “care advocate,” or—maybe, just maybe—I can click a button to cancel if my account is “eligible.” If you’re an Comcast Xfinity cable or internet subscriber, you have to schedule an appointment to call, speak to a Comcast representative, and likely listen to a bevy of special offers and discounts just short of the rep begging you to stay in order to cancel. (Pro tip: This is a great way to get a discount.) Or you can simply go into a Xfinity Store or mail a letter—yes, a physical letter—to Comcast Cable in Philadelphia. If you have a gym membership, forget about it. You might as well just give up now.

But soon, businesses will need to provide much easier options for customers trying to cancel their services.

The U.S. Federal Trade Commission, the government’s primary consumer protection agency, finalized a new regulatory rule on Wednesday that aims to make it easier for people to cancel those pesky subscriptions. The so-called click-to-cancel rule will require online sellers to remove “endless hoops” in order to cancel a subscription. “The FTC’s rule will end these tricks and traps, saving Americans time and money,” said FTC Chair Lina Khan in a press release. “Nobody should be stuck paying for a service they no longer want.” It’s something that the agency says has become an all-too-common source of outrage for American consumers: In 2024, the FTC received 70 consumer complaints per day about unfair subscription practices.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Related From Slate Disney Abandoned a Brazen Legal Tactic. Uber Is Doubling Down. Read More

The FTC said it’s “modernizing” the 1973 Negative Option Rule in order to carry out its mission of combating unfair and deceptive business practices. (“Negative option marketing” is a term that the regulator uses to mean any business practice where customers need to take affirmative steps to reject or cancel service lest they are billed anyway.)

The three Democrats on the five-person, bipartisan commission voted in favor of the rule, which will take full effect in 180 days.

Melissa Holyoak, one of the two Republican commissioners who voted against approving the rule, expressed doubt about the legality of the rule and claimed that Khan was rushing into action in order to help Vice President Kamala Harris win the presidential election: “Less than a month from election day, the Chair is hurrying to finish a rule that follows through on a campaign pledge made by the Chair’s favored presidential candidate.” On the campaign trail, Harris has promised to eliminate so-called junk fees on consumers.

If we save so much time getting rid of our unneeded subscriptions with one click, perhaps we’ll finally have extra time to track down the real villain this election season: all of those damn campaign texts and emails that are seemingly impossible to cancel. When we fix that, society might be cured for good.
On Tuesday, a Georgia court scored a victory for the rule of law and free and fair elections. Judge Robert McBurney issued an order stopping the enforcement of a Sept. 20 rule promulgated by the MAGA majority of the State Election Board. With early voting in Georgia about to begin, McBurney’s order stated that the rule was “too much, too late” in the election cycle.

The rule would have required the hand counting of ballots in the Nov. 5 election and imposed a complex process for doing so. Enforcement of the rule would make certification of the Georgia election by Nov. 11, as required by state law, a virtual impossibility.

In a parallel ruling the day before, McBurney, an appointee of former Republican Gov. Nathan Deal, tossed out the 2024 election-denying lawsuit of uber-Trumpist Julie Adams. Like the hand-count rule, her action aimed to sabotage the election by delaying the certification of any Harris-Walz victory in the state. And with the presidential contest likely to turn on a razor’s edge, chaos in Georgia might mean chaos across the nation.

Meanwhile, on Monday in Stockholm the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences was awarded to three Americans—Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson—two of whom wrote the bestseller, Why Nations Fail.

That award and the two state court rulings in Georgia may seem unrelated, but there is a through line worth attending to as Nov. 5 approaches. Nations fail without the rule of law, and in America, Trump and his allies have the rule of law under relentless attack. Nobel Prize–winning economists are telling us that we cannot continue to be great and prosperous if Trump and his followers succeed.

Advertisement

Their warning builds on the insights of Milton Friedman, the famous free-market economist who “believed the limitations on government concentration of economic power, adherence to the rule of law, respect for property rights and enforcement of contracts, was central to the prosperity of the free world.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

The Nobel Prize, according to the Washington Post, was awarded for the laureates’ work showing that “societies with a poor rule of law, in addition to institutions that exploit the population, do not generate growth or change for the better.” Countries with institutions that uphold law create predictability for investors and “inclusiveness”; even-handed legal institutions support equal opportunity for the many and encourage the innovation necessary for a society to thrive.

Related From Slate Suddenly, the Electoral College Is Posing a Problem for Trump Read More

By contrast, countries that develop “extractive institutions”—ones that squeeze resources from the wider population “to benefit the elites”—experience persistently low levels of economic growth and a reduced standard of living.

Advertisement

The journey from those high-level, macro-economic insights to this week’s election law rulings in Georgia is shorter than you think. That’s because the State Election Board’s hand-count rule and Julie Adams’ lawsuit are both part of a full-bore MAGA assault on the rule of law. Republicans have filed more than 100 preelection lawsuits. Their overarching point, and that of the hand-count rule, is to bolster the narrative that is surely coming if Trump loses: that “the election was rigged” and must be overturned, including by violence.

In Adams’ case, she is a MAGA member of the Fulton County (that’s Atlanta) local election board. She has already refused to certify one election. As is typical of Trumpists’ right-wing court efforts, Adams’ legal complaint in McBurney’s courtroom was sheer nonsense. It claimed that local election board members have the discretion to vote against certifying the election.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Georgia election law is crystal clear about their duty to certify elections. It says that a local board member “shall” certify her jurisdiction’s election returns “not later than 5:00 P.M. on the Monday following the date on which such election was held.” That language leaves no room for doubt about what officers like Adams have to do.

McBurney pulled no punches about what was at stake:

Advertisement

The certainty of the electoral process that these laws have long brought to Georgia’s voters has begun to unravel as key participants in the State’s election management system have increasingly sought to impose their own rules and approaches that are either inconsistent with or flatly contrary to the letter of these laws.

As he explained:

Advertisement

While the [local election official] must investigate concerns about miscounts and must report those concerns to a prosecutor if they persist … the existence of those concerns, those doubts, and those worries is not cause to delay or decline certification.

Adams was represented by the Trump-aligned America First Policy Institute. The institute and its adherents are not really committed to the law. The ends, they believe, justify the means of ignoring clear legislative language.

Advertisement

Advertisement

That is the MAGA world’s current and abiding worldview accompanying Trump’s unremitting campaign to end legal constraints on him. A key early step of fascists like Viktor Orbán was to take control of the law by taking control of the courts.

But what Trump, Orbán, and their ilk don’t tell us is that their plans enable them to enrich themselves and their cronies and to rule without guardrails. But it is and will be unendurably costly to everyone else.

Advertisement

Professors Nisha Bellinger and Byunghwan Son argue that “When a one-time democracy turns toward authoritarianism … the economic effect is often negative. That’s because, in a democracy … [l]awmakers check impulsive decisions by presidents.”

Impulsive decision-making is Trump’s signature style. Without the rule of law and checks on his power, the pain will, sooner or later, be felt in our wallets.

McBurney’s two Georgia rulings show that we still have jurists of integrity able to maintain the law’s guardrails on a would-be authoritarian’s power. And the Nobel Prize in economics is a reminder that the rule of law is not just about maintaining those constraints on dictatorship. It’s also about our economic well-being. Let’s hope that Americans can connect the dots by Nov. 5.
Three weeks from Wednesday, every eligible ballot in the 2024 presidential election will have been cast. Election officials will have worked long into the night across the country to tabulate millions of votes. By the morning of Nov. 6, we may finally have an answer to the question those of us who work in, or around, politics have received constantly for months: “Who’s going to win?”

It’s unfortunately the one question that nobody can answer with any certainty. There is no clear outcome in sight. There are no debates waiting ahead for Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump to share a stage. And there are no major events to circle on the calendar before the polls open. There is only a seeming eternity ahead for a race that lacks any clear favorite. The uncertainty makes these few remaining weeks particularly maddening, amplifying the smallest potential shift as monumental while leaving little room for the race to be fundamentally altered.

It’s unfortunately the one question that nobody can answer with any certainty.

In the 1970s, Japanese engineer researcher Masahiro Moti noted that “in climbing toward the goal of making robots appear human, our affinity for them increases until we come to a valley, which I call the uncanny valley.” The things that rest in this valley can cause a feeling of deep unease, distress and dismay as our minds struggle to categorize something that comes close to, but falls short of, appearing human.I’ve come to see this October as the uncanny valley of the election cycle. Stuck between the dynamism of the summer and the surety of November, Americans scour for anything to break the tension. The elusive “October Surprise” has accordingly gone from an event that nobody could see coming to a quadrennial prediction that has more often fallen flat, as pundits and politicos hunt for something — anything — to shake up the race.

Unfortunately, the main balm that we all turn to in these moments isn’t as curative as we may want. The latest national poll from NBC News shows Harris and Trump in a “dead heat,” with 48% each from registered voters and a margin of error of ±3.1%. On the surface, that seems like a major problem when polling in September showed Harris with a 6-point lead over Trump and the same margin of error.In practice, though, the margin of error means those two poll results aren’t as far apart than they seem. Furthermore, these snapshots are our best guesses of how people within a pool of respondents feel right now, but they aren’t the predictors that people want them to be. The usefulness of frantically refreshing polling averages is roughly the same as staring into an empty teacup looking for a sign among the leaves.

Polls showing a stable race after Harris caught up, then passed Trump once President Joe Biden dropped out should be a comfort to Democrats. But panic is a tried-and-true part of Democratic identity, even when an electoral landslide is just around the corner. These final weeks are always a time of second-guessing, when the candidate’s every choice up to that point is re-adjudicated and every sign is a red flag of impending disaster.

Unlike the campaigns of her predecessors, Harris’ campaign has played out on a condensed timeline, and with that compression comes greater heat and intensity. And so a billion dollars raised since Harris jumped into the race transforms into a potentially worrying sign that donors might not provide needed cash in the final sprint. Decisions on where to spend time and what message to send while there, whom to sit with for interviews, how resources are distributed among allies all become fodder for speculation about why Harris may lose.

Harris’ campaign has played out on a condensed timeline, and with that compression comes greater heat and intensity.

The sheer amount of noise generated trying to make sense of everything becomes a problem in itself. We’re awash in a sea of opinions that are telling Harris she needs to change up her strategy in various contradictory ways before it’s too late. These last few weeks are just enough time to turn a ship as big as a presidential campaign, at least in theory, to focus on the One Big Thing that will secure a win. In an election this close, though, there are so many different variables to try to solve for that it can feel impossible to find a formula that denies Trump an electoral victory.The resulting calculus sees Harris’ campaign desperately trying to put together a coalition that can remain stable for the next 21 days. How do you both win back Black men who are open to Trump’s ham-fisted appeals while also being relatable to the Never Trump Republicans you’re wooing? How do you persuade progressives to turn out despite their hesitance over American support for Israel’s war in Gaza while also focusing on slowing inflation and driving down consumer prices?

I’ll let you in on a professional secret here: I don’t have an answer to those questions. Even the people doing the work of trying to win this election don’t know for sure. These next three weeks are set to be a period of distinct discomfort as we stare into the unknown. There is no quick fix that will calm the vibes and reassure nervous Democrats. Instead, the most powerful thing we can do with an uncomfortable feeling is to acknowledge its sources and work toward the changes we wish to see.
No force is as animating in this election as gender. One candidate stands to be the first female president of the United States, while the other runs a campaign of aggrieved masculinity. Abortion remains a top campaign issue after Donald Trump appointed Supreme Court justices who overturned Roe v. Wade and set reproductive rights back by, in some states, as many as 150 years. And finally, there are the voters among whom a vast gender gap has cleaved open.

Recent NBC News polling shows women breaking for Vice President Kamala Harris by 14 points. Men, on the other hand, support the former president by a 16-point margin. The gender gap is so pronounced that Trump, who dropped out of the third presidential debate after losing the second one to Harris, participated in a Fox News town hall that aired Wednesday to talk specifically to female voters. The audience, which was women only, watched as Trump called Sen. Katie Britt "fantastically attractive" and bizarrely anointed himself the “father of IVF.”

“Female voters” are a notably heterogenous pool and considering them as a single entity is unhelpful bordering on political malpractice.

Much has been written about the overt gender politics of this election. Harris seems to be playing down her gender, presumably in an effort to appeal to a broad swath of voters, but the historic nature of her candidacy makes the issue hard to hide. Trump, on the other hand, chose a running mate who has repeatedly maligned “childless cat ladies.” Hulk Hogan ripped off a U.S. flag tank top at the Republican National Convention. Even some Trump supporters say they worry that the campaign's testosterone-fueled, boorish rhetoric may be turning off female voters.

But “female voters” are a notably heterogenous pool and considering them as a single entity is unhelpful bordering on political malpractice. Take, for example, the discourse around white women, which came to the fore after Trump won this demographic in 2016. It is true that more white women voted for Trump than for then-Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, and they may very well do so again. But white women are the country’s largest voting bloc when you break the electorate out by race and gender, and this enormous group was almost evenly divided in 2016 and 2020.

According to Pew data, white voters made up nearly 70% of the electorate in 2016 (Black and Hispanic voters each made up 11%). Women outvoted men that same year, with 67% of white women saying they voted in 2016. By comparison, 63% of white men and 64% of Black women voted, along with just 54% of Black men, 50% of Hispanic women, 45% of Hispanic men, fewer than half of Asian men and women.

Democrats absolutely must turn out voters of color in order to win, and Black voters in particular have been essential to Democratic victories. But Democrats could potentially secure every nonwhite vote in the U.S. and still lose. They have to figure out which white voters — specifically white women — are winnable. And that means resisting the urge to dumb things down. Observations about huge demographic groups — things such as “white women voted for Trump” or “women are backing Harris” — don’t tell us nearly enough.

Understanding the why behind the Trump-supporting segments of these huge populations is key. Trump’s base includes several subgroups of white women: those without college degrees, those who are evangelical Christians and those who live in the South. According to a recent NPR/PBS News/Marist Poll, close to 60% of college-educated white women say they plan to vote for Harris, while 55% of white women without college degrees, and a whopping 70% of white men without degrees, are backing Trump. So one crucial question becomes: How can Trump’s boorish behavior be so appalling to so many women and seemingly so acceptable to others?

The answer lies in various stubborn American subcultural norms. Male violence is a problem everywhere, for example, but researchers have pointed to the ways in which white Southern honor culture is different from, say, the dominant culture of the Northeast. Southern white women in particular have long been portrayed as objects that both demand and require protection; similar narratives of female weakness and the necessity of male protection and authority suffuse white evangelical religious beliefs. And the benefits of male protection and respect are higher because the penalties are more extreme. A woman who is seen as sexually audacious (or simply a feminist) will almost certainly have a harder go of it in a white Southern Baptist community than among, say, white college-educated Brooklynites.

One crucial question becomes: How can Trump’s boorish behavior be so appalling to so many women and seemingly so acceptable to others?

There’s also some evidence that men overcompensate and become more aggressive when their status is threatened. One 2013 study found that “men given feedback suggesting they were feminine expressed more support for war, homophobic attitudes, and interest in purchasing an SUV.” Members of the Trump campaign team have taken to accusing insufficiently MAGA men of being “cucks” — slang for men emasculated by cheating wives.

White evangelical churches may not as readily embrace the naughty words, but they have long evinced a toned-down version of the same misogyny, adopting edicts of male leadership and female submission. Women are not allowed to take senior pastor and other top leadership roles in many (and possibly most) evangelical churches; the Southern Baptist Convention, America’s largest evangelical denomination, has purged churches that ordain women as pastors.

James Dobson, founder of Focus on the Family and one of the country’s most influential evangelicals, is clear on “the role of the female as help-meet, bread-baker, wound-patcher, love giver, home builder, and child-bearer” and the female obligation of submission to masculine leadership (he does, generously, encourage husbands to give their wives “one day of recreation each week”). It’s unsurprising that women steeped in a culture that not only demands, but also sanctifies female submission and male dominance might not embrace a female leader. Outside of the church, women who are more accustomed to conservative cultural norms of male grievance, aggression and violence may simply have a greater tolerance for Trump’s actions and rhetoric.

This is not to say that college-educated women living in large northern cities are surrounded by wonderfully feminist men; bad male behavior, that includes violence and simple entitlement, is everywhere. But there really are significant cultural differences between white Americans according to region, religion, education and urbanity, and these differences make for very different political preferences and voting patterns.

The overarching gender gap narrative is true. Trump really is cleaning up with male voters, and white ones in particular. He really is making inroads with Black men: While 80% of Black men voted for Joe Biden in 2020, 70% now say they support Harris, according to a recent New York Times/Siena poll, while 1 in 5 are backing Trump. But this needs more context. The “Black men for Trump” story is interesting primarily because it’s a shift, not because anything close to a majority of Black men support Trump. The fact that Harris enjoys the support of 70% of Black men means that demographic backs her more strongly than any other race/gender group except Black women.

The numbers for Hispanic voters are far starker, according to that same Times/Siena poll: Trump is winning Hispanic men by 5 points, while 59% of Hispanic women currently support Harris. And Harris really is doing quite well with women. According to some polls, she is even enjoying a small lead among white women.

White women remain the least likely to support Democrats. That fact can lend itself to easy narratives.

Among female voters, white women remain the least likely to support Democrats. That fact can lend itself to easy narratives and self-righteousness, becoming a justification for finger-wagging: After Trump narrowly won the white female vote in 2016, a few demonstrators at the anti-Trump Women’s March held signs admonishing white women, even though the pussy-hat-wearing marchers were not the white ladies who voted him into office. In response, many white liberal women pledged to “do better” and call in their peers, despite the fact that liberal white college-educated women living in big cities likely have few, if any, Trump-voting pals. An important moment of reckoning — a realization that a lot of women do not vote in what feminists would say are their interests — became, unfortunately, a vast oversimplification.

Ultimately, elections capture a population at a particular moment in time. The work of social movements is to shift the views of that population over time, not just to win elections, but also to change societies. To understand the race and gender gaps in this election, we must also understand how the power of male grievance plays in different cultural contexts. In a country as vast and diverse as the U.S., culture shifts not just along racial lines, but also according to where one lives, how (and if) one worships, what opportunities one does or does not have access to, and — for women — how the men around them feel about their status as men, and how those men behave as a result.
Shortly after Democrats rallied behind Kamala Harris as the party’s 2024 nominee, Donald Trump thought the smart move would be to launch a series of personal attacks. A great many Republicans offered some simple advice: Stop.

Sen. Lindsey Graham appeared on NBC News’ “Meet the Press” in August, for example, and issued a public plea. “President Trump can win this election. His policies are good for America, and if you have a policy debate for president, he wins,” the South Carolina Republican said. “Donald Trump the provocateur, the showman, may not win this election.”

Trump, of course, ignored the advice for a variety of reasons.

If Trump could talk about the substantive details of governing and policymaking, he would. But he can’t.

For one thing, the former president has said he feels “entitled“ to launch personal attacks. For another, Trump, at least on some level, likely knows that his policies aren’t especially popular.

But there’s long been a problem that his party struggles to fully appreciate: Trump doesn’t talk about policy because he can’t. The former president has never been able to speak coherently about governing, and with three weeks remaining before Election Day, nothing has changed.

The Atlantic’s David Graham summarized the Republican’s appearance at the Economic Club of Chicago this way: “When Donald Trump speaks about the economy, he sounds like a child.”

China gives us billions of dollars via tariffs. American auto workers take imported cars out of a box and stick the pieces together. These are very light paraphrases of statements he made today at the Economic Club of Chicago, in a sometimes combative interview with the Bloomberg editor in chief John Micklethwait.

At times, it was difficult to watch. Asked, for example, about the dramatic impact his plans would have on the national debt, Trump said a great many words, none of which answered the question. Asked about Google — a company the former president has threatened to prosecute in response to a conspiracy theory he concocted — the GOP candidate changed the subject.

Trump didn’t seem to know what the chairman of the Federal Reserve does. He spoke a great deal about trade tariffs but struggled with the details. He talked about reserve currencies but didn’t seem to know what they are. When the conversation turned to small businesses, the former president talked about Apple — prompting his host to explain that Apple is not a small business.

At one point, Trump thought it’d be a good idea to insult auto industry workers, claiming that children could do their jobs just as well. Around the same time, in response to a question about cutting federal spending, he shared an anecdote about Air Force One that wasn’t true.

In June, the Business Roundtable offered the Republican an opportunity to meet privately with a room full of leading CEOs. One told NBC News after the discussion, “Trump doesn’t know what he’s talking about.”

He still doesn't.

It’s not as if Trump occasionally has bad days but is otherwise up to speed on economic policy. The night before the event in Chicago, a voter asked him about addressing the price of groceries, and his long, meandering answer was effectively gibberish.

Two days earlier, the GOP candidate effectively admitted that when it comes to proposed trade tariffs, he essentially just makes up numbers off the top of his head. “Until now I’ve said 200[%],” he told Fox News. “I’m using that just as a figure. I’ll say 100, 200, I’ll say 500, I don’t care.”

For months, Trump has been repeatedly asked how he intends to address inflation, and he’s never been able to answer in a coherent way.

I can appreciate why Republican officials keep urging their nominee to focus on policy, but they’re effectively asking squirrels to do trigonometry: If Trump could talk about the substantive details of governing and policymaking, he would. But he can’t, so he doesn’t.
Arizona is a swing state. So why is former President Donald Trump handily beating Vice President Kamala Harris in recent polls of Arizona voters?

After decades as a perennial red state, consistently voting for Republicans, Arizona turned purple in 2018, electing Kyrsten Sinema as its first Democratic U.S. senator in 30 years. Then in 2020, the state elected Democrat Mark Kelly to the Senate and went for Joe Biden over Trump by just over 10,000 votes — the first time a majority of Arizonans voted for a Democrat for president since Bill Clinton in 1996 (Harry Truman was the last Democrat to win Arizona before Clinton, back in 1948). Most recently, in 2022, Democrats took the majority of statewide offices, including governor, secretary of state and attorney general.

After decades as a perennial red state, consistently voting for Republicans, Arizona turned purple in 2018.

But a New York Times/Philadelphia Inquirer/Siena College poll conducted this month showed the former president up by a full 6 percentage points (with a margin of error of 4 points). Is the state swinging back to deep red? Probably not, but it’s complicated.

Arizona’s Democratic Party is hemorrhaging voters, dropping from 1.38 million in 2020 to 1.19 million in 2024. Republicans dropped, too, from 1.5 million to 1.45 million in 2024, but the much larger drop in Democratic voters is glaring, especially in a state now led by Democratic Gov. Katie Hobbs.

Arizona’s unaffiliated voters have always been a large voting bloc, but that group is growing. In Maricopa County — the most populous county in the state and the fourth-largest in the country — Democrats voters fell from 814,000 to 692,000 in 2024. Biden won Republican-heavy Maricopa County in 2020, but Republicans’ voter advantage is much larger today.

Arizona is also missing strong statewide leadership despite having a Democratic governor. Hobbs is missing in action when it comes to the presidential and Senate races. She has not publicly appeared with Harris or her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz — despite numerous Arizona visits. Other swing-state governors, like Josh Shapiro in Pennsylvania, Gretchen Whitmer in Michigan and Roy Cooper in North Carolina, are pulling out all the stops for the Democratic ticket, but Hobbs and her team are fumbling what should be a tactical advantage for Harris in Arizona.

Arizona has the fourth-largest Hispanic population in the country, making up one-third of the state’s population. Polls show Harris receiving much less support from this vital voting bloc than Biden did four years ago.

Border security and illegal immigration are top issues nationwide, but Arizona is the only swing state where they are truly front and center. The recent one-hour Senate debate between Ruben Gallego and Kari Lake included no less than 30 minutes on immigration and border security issues.

Border security and illegal immigration are top issues nationwide, but Arizona is the only swing state where they are truly front and center.

Arizona also has an initiative on the ballot this year that purports to give law enforcement expanded powers to arrest immigrants who entered the country illegally. The latest polls show that ballot initiative favored by about 60% of Arizonans. The Biden/Harris administration is seen by most Arizonans, including Democratic politicians, as failing Arizona border towns and counties that are often overwhelmed with asylum-seekers and those who crossed the border illegally. These issues are personal to many Arizonans.

Arizona has a strong MAGA contingent, including some of the most extreme members of Congress in Reps. Andy Biggs, Paul Gosar and Eli Crane. It is the home of the money-raising MAGA activist group Turning Point USA. And yet, despite this loud minority contingent, every Trump-endorsed Republican candidate for statewide office lost in 2022, while Republicans who did not go all in on Trump won their races for treasurer, superintendent of public instruction and Corporation Commission. Lake lost the governor’s race in 2020 (although she still calls herself Arizona’s rightful governor and has pending election lawsuits to this day) and is greatly underperforming Trump in her Senate race.

That’s why all hope is not lost for Harris’ winning Arizona in 2024 — the state is truly purple. But she must overcome these significant headwinds if she wants to be only the fourth Democrat to win Arizona’s presidential vote in the last 76 years.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Two of the many Biden administration officials who have resigned in protest over the U.S. government’s current policy on Israel and the Palestinian people are taking matters into their own hands by launching a lobbying group and political action committee to help change Washington’s approach to the Middle East in a way that supports Palestinian freedom and Israeli and American accountability.

The former officials, Josh Paul and Tariq Habash, launched A New Policy and A New Policy PAC on Wednesday, just a week after the first anniversary of Hamas militants’ deadly attack on Israel, which triggered Israel’s ongoing U.S.-funded retaliation in Gaza that could soon turn into a regional war. HuffPost spoke with both officials on Tuesday about the group, which they said is nonpartisan.

Advertisement

“I think it’s very clear that the policies that the United States has been pursuing, certainly for the last year and frankly before that, have been deeply harmful to the Palestinian people ― but also to American interests where we are seeing ourselves, our credibility around the world shattered, the stability of the Middle East cast into doubt, and civil rights at home also increasingly damaged by the debate around this issue,” said Paul, who was director of the State Department’s Bureau of Political-Military Affairs before becoming the first Biden administration official to publicly resign over the government’s Gaza policy.

Josh Paul, shown here in Grinnell, Iowa, on Feb. 18, is a former State Department career officer who resigned in protest over the administration's support for Israel's war in Gaza. Kathryn Gamble/The Washington Post via Getty Images

A New Policy plans to tackle U.S. policy reform on the Middle East, specifically regarding Israel and the Palestinians, by attempting to reshape the politics around the issue. This means the group will focus on advocating for foreign and domestic policy changes, such as putting conditions on arm sales to Israel, supporting an end to Israeli occupation, ensuring that any U.S. role in the diplomatic process does not incentivize using violence, and strengthening civil rights protections for Americans critical of the current U.S.-Israeli relationship.

“We’ve been talking about this for a long time, but there’s been a lot of support from the community, from partner organizations, from the now-growing number of resignees who’ve been very interested in finding ways to really be supportive of this effort,” said Habash, a Palestinian American who was appointed to the Department of Education before quitting in January.

Advertisement

“And so we don’t see this as just our project,” he added. “We see this as, like, an institution for all Americans to be part of this.”

Paul and Habash were part of a July letter signed by a dozen departing Biden administration staffers and obtained exclusively by HuffPost. The letter called President Joe Biden’s policy on Gaza a “threat to U.S. national security” on top of the tens of thousands of Palestinians whom Israel killed using American weaponry. The ex-officials urged remaining government officials to challenge the status quo.

Habash said that while he was at the Department of Education, it became “very clear” that there was “no appetite” from the government to actually address U.S. policy that was enabling the destruction of civilian lives and infrastructure in Gaza and that the White House’s inability to allow for dissenting opinions on the matter resulted in a “chilling effect on political appointees across the administration, in a way that made it impossible to actually improve the circumstances that Americans were feeling.”

The decision to launch A New Policy just weeks before the U.S. election is not lost on the former officials, who said they felt it was important to avoid appearing as if they formed the group in response to whoever wins the presidential race.

“Our effort, I think, transcends this one election, right? It is more than just what’s happening in November. This is an issue that continues to undermine our own national interests and our American values in a way that is dangerous in the long term,” Habash said, with Paul echoing that the issue will persist regardless of who becomes president.

Advertisement

A New Policy’s PAC arm is meant to help finance candidates whose platforms include support for Palestinian liberation and for the U.S. to abide by American and international law, and Paul said that the group will make some contributions ahead of Nov. 5 before focusing on future election cycles. The contributions will mostly go toward national congressional candidates, though Habash stressed that they hope to work with regional and grassroots partners to support state and local races as well.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Washington CNN —

Former President Donald Trump, who trails with women in recent national polls, participated in a Fox News town hall event on Tuesday in front of a female audience.

He told a bunch of lies.

The Republican presidential nominee made at least 19 false claims in the one-hour event that aired Wednesday morning – most of them debunked earlier in the campaign but some of them new, notably including an absurd claim that he is “the father of IVF.”

Trump’s falsehoods included repeat lies on the subjects of abortion, immigration, inflation and national security. Here is a fact check.

Opinions on Roe v. Wade: Trump repeated his false claim that “everybody,” even “the Democrats” and “the liberals,” wanted the Roe v. Wade abortion rights decision overturned and the power to set abortion policy left to individual states; he added, “Nobody wanted it to be in the federal government.”

It’s not even close to true that “everybody” wanted Roe overturned or that “the Democrats” did. A large majority of Americans and an overwhelming majority of Democrats wanted the Supreme Court to preserve Roe in 2022, according to numerous polls. Democratic support for Roe exceeded 80% in many polls and 90% in some polls.

Trump and in vitro fertilization (IVF): Trump declared that he is entirely in favor of IVF. But Trump also falsely claimed, “I’m the father of IVF.” This is just nonsense. The first child conceived through IVF was born in 1978; Trump, clearly, had nothing to do with it, and he said in this same town hall answer that he only recently had IVF explained to him by a Republican senator.

Harris’ border role: Trump, criticizing his election opponent Vice President Kamala Harris, repeated his false claim that President Joe Biden “made her border czar.” Biden never made Harris “border czar,” a label the White House has always emphasized is inaccurate. In reality, Biden gave Harris a more limited immigration-related assignment in 2021, asking her to lead diplomacy with El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras in an attempt to address the conditions that prompted their citizens to try to migrate to the United States.

Harris’ border visits: Trump, speaking about Harris and the border, repeated his false claim that “she never even went there.” Harris did go to the border as vice president, in Texas in mid-2021 and then again in Arizona last month; many Republicans had criticized Harris prior to the 2021 visit for not having gone, and some later argued that she didn’t go frequently enough, but the claim that she “never” went has not been true for more than three years.

An immigration chart and migration levels: Trump repeated his false claim that his favorite immigration chart – which he had fortunately turned his head to look at when a gunman tried to kill him at a campaign rally in July – shows that “the day I left office” had the lowest level of border crossings.

The chart doesn’t show that. In fact, the arrow on the chart that Trump keeps saying points to a record-low level of southern border crossings on the day or week he left office actually points to April 2020, when Trump still had more than eight months left in his term and global migration had slowed to a trickle because of the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. After hitting a roughly three-year low (not an all-time low) in April 2020, migration numbers at the southern border increased each month through the end of Trump’s term.

The number of migrants: Trump, speaking about migration, repeated his false claim that “21 million people came in over the last three years, with them.” Through August, the country had recorded about 10.3 million nationwide “encounters” with migrants during the Biden-Harris administration, including millions who were rapidly expelled from the country; even adding in so-called “gotaways” who evaded detection, estimated by House Republicans as being roughly 2 million, there’s no way the total is “21 million.”

The border wall: Trump repeated his false claim that he built “571 miles of wall” on the southern border. That’s a significant exaggeration; official government data shows 458 miles were built under Trump – including both wall built where no barriers had existed before and wall built to replace previous barriers.

Immigration judges: Trump, criticizing the fact that asylum seekers who arrive at the border have access to a US legal process before they are deported, falsely claimed that “No other country has judges at the border.” In reality, the US is far from the only country to let asylum seekers make their case before judges or legal tribunals.

“This statement is patently false,” James Hathaway, then a law professor and Director of the Program in Refugee and Asylum Law at the University of Michigan, told this reporter during Trump’s presidency in response to a previous version of Trump’s claim. “It is completely routine in other countries that, like the U.S., have signed the UN refugee treaties for asylum-seekers to have access to the domestic legal system to make a protection claim (and to be allowed in while the claim is pending).”

The legal status of immigrants in Springfield, Ohio: Trump falsely claimed, “They just dropped 30,000 illegal aliens in Springfield, Ohio.”

This is false in more than one way. While we don’t know the immigration status of each and every Haitian immigrant in Springfield, the community is, on the whole, in the country lawfully. The Springfield city website says, “YES, Haitian immigrants are here legally, under the Immigration Parole Program. Once here, immigrants are then eligible to apply for Temporary Protected Status (TPS).” Republican Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine wrote in a New York Times op-ed about Springfield in September that the Haitian immigrants “are there legally” and that, as a Trump-Vance supporter, he is “saddened” by the candidates’ disparagement of “the legal migrants living in Springfield.”

Second, nobody “dropped” the immigrants in Springfield; the city’s Haitian residents were not sent there by a government resettlement program. Rather, they independently decided to move to the city because of employment opportunities, affordable housing and the presence of a Haitian community, among other factors.

And while there is no official tally of the number of immigrants in Springfield, Trump’s “30,000” figure exceeds local estimates. The website for the city of Springfield says there are an estimated 12,000 to 15,000 immigrants in the county that includes Springfield, where the total population is about 138,000. Chris Cook, the county’s health commissioner, said in July that his team estimated the best number was 10,000 to 12,000 Haitian residents in the county.

Immigrants in Springfield: Trump claimed that immigrants in Springfield are on “probation,” and he added, “Probation is for prisoners.” This is false in two ways.

First, Trump got his terms wrong. Many Haitians came into the country under a Biden-Harris administration parole program – not “probation” – that gives permission to enter the US to vetted participants with US sponsors. And though the word “parole” is most commonly used in the context of criminal prisoners who are let out early on certain conditions, in the context of immigration policy, “parole” does not mean that someone was let out of prison or had ever been in prison.

Rather, as the federal government explains on its website, “The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) allows the secretary of homeland security to use their discretion to parole any noncitizen applying for admission into the United States temporarily for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit.” The government has used the parole authority in the past to grant entry to certain people fleeing crises in Cuba, Vietnam, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Lebanon and elsewhere.

Current inflation: Trump tried to dismiss the decline in inflation over the last two years, and he falsely said, “You know when they say, ‘Well, we’re stopping inflation cause it went down now to 4.5%.’ Well, 4.5% is very high, very high, meaning it’s going up. Because it was at 3.” The most recent available inflation rate at the time Trump spoke here was 2.4% in September, not 4.5%, and this was the slowest rate since February 2021, not a jump from a lower rate.

Cumulative inflation under Biden-Harris: Trump, speaking about total inflation under the Biden-Harris administration, said, “They say 21%, I think it’s 50%.” Trump’s “50%” figure is baseless; cumulative inflation during the Biden-Harris administration has indeed been about 21%.

Inflation records under Biden-Harris: Trump repeated his false claim that the US has all-time record inflation under the Biden-Harris administration, saying, “We had the worst – they say it’s in 48 years – I say ever. We had the worst inflation in the history of our country.”

The US inflation rate hit a 40-year high in June 2022, when it was 9.1%, but that was not close to the all-time record of 23.7%, set in 1920.

Trump’s tax cuts: Trump repeated his false claim that “I gave you the largest tax cuts in the history of our country.” Expert analyses have found that his 2017 tax cut law was not the largest in US history, either in percentage of gross domestic product or in inflation-adjusted dollars.

Oil from Venezuela: Trump, criticizing Venezuelan oil, repeated his false claim that “the only refinery that can do it is in Houston, Texas.” Various other refineries in the US refine Venezuelan oil.

Trump and US troops in Syria: Trump falsely claimed, “I got out of Syria.” Trump reduced the US military presence in Syria but kept a contingent of troops there throughout his presidency, even after he claimed US troops were “out” (other than to protect oil sites, he added). Two US troops died in vehicle rollovers in Syria in 2020, his last calendar year in office.

Trump and the defeat of ISIS: Trump, touting the defeat of the ISIS terror group, repeated his false claim that “it was supposed to take literally five years and I did it in a month.” Aside from the fact that Trump doesn’t merit sole credit, the ISIS “caliphate” was declared fully liberated more than two years into his presidency.

The US military presence in South Korea: Trump falsely claimed the US has “42,000 soldiers” in South Korea. Pentagon statistics show that Trump’s figure is a significant exaggeration; as of June 30, 2024, there were 27,076 US military personnel in South Korea, including civilians working for the Department of Defense.

South Korea’s payments for the US military presence: Trump, speaking again of the US military presence in South Korea, falsely claimed that “they” (South Korea) “don’t pay,” adding that Biden “said they don’t pay anymore.”

In fact, South Korea agreed under Biden and Harris to pay more for the US military presence than it had been paying during the Trump era. Completing the negotiations that began under Trump, South Korea agreed in March 2021 to a 2021 payment increase of 13.9% — meaning its payment that year would be about $1 billion — and then additional increases in 2022 through 2025 tied to increases in South Korea’s defense budget.

The two countries reached a tentative agreement early this month for another deal covering the period from 2026 to 2030, which would begin with an 8.3% increase over the 2025 payment.
A federal judge has ordered Alabama to stop trying to purge voters before Election Day

toggle caption Elijah Nouvelage/Getty Images

A federal judge on Wednesday temporarily blocked Alabama’s voter removal program in one of the major legal fights over voter purges in Republican-led states ahead of this fall’s Election Day.

The court ruling comes after the Justice Department and civil rights groups represented by the Campaign Legal Center challenged what the office of Alabama Secretary of State Wes Allen, a Republican, has called “strategic efforts” to “remove noncitizens registered to vote” from the state’s voter rolls.

A federal law known as the National Voter Registration Act bans Alabama and other states from systematically removing people from their lists of registered voters within 90 days of a federal election, also known as the “quiet period” before Election Day.

Sponsor Message

In August, 84 days before Election Day, Allen announced a process for purging 3,251 registered Alabama voters who had been issued noncitizen identification numbers by the Department of Homeland Security. Non-U.S. citizens are not allowed to vote in federal and state elections. But among those put on the path to removal, Allen acknowledged, are U.S. citizens who were naturalized and are eligible to vote.

In the decision, U.S. District Judge Anna Manasco, who was nominated by former President Donald Trump, ruled that the state violated the NVRA’s “quiet period” provision and ordered Allen to put the voter removal program on pause through Nov. 5.

“This year, Alabama Secretary of State Wes Allen (1) blew the deadline when he announced a purge program to begin eighty-four days before the 2024 General Election, (2) later admitted that his purge list included thousands of United States citizens (in addition to far fewer noncitizens, who are ineligible to vote), and (3) in any event, referred everyone on the purge list to the Alabama Attorney General for criminal investigation,” Manasco wrote in the court order.

The court also directed Allen’s office to issue guidance to county election officials on restoring registered voters to the state’s rolls, announce the court’s order on the secretary of state’s website and inform the state’s attorney general that they had inaccurately referred a number of Alabamians to be investigated.

Sponsor Message

“I will comply with the order of the federal court,” Allen said in a statement.

Alabama’s challengers are calling the ruling a victory for voting rights.

“This action sends a clear message that the Justice Department will work to ensure that the rights of eligible voters are protected,” Assistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke, of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, said in a statement.

“No U.S. citizen should be afraid to vote, and we are proud to have defended Alabamians ahead of the upcoming election,” said Kate Huddleston, the Campaign Legal Center’s senior legal counsel. “Today’s court decision helps protect Alabama citizens’ freedom to register and vote without concerns about government interference or intimidation.”

Similar lawsuits have been filed in Virginia by the Justice Department, as well as the Virginia Coalition for Immigrant Rights. They are challenging an August executive order by Republican Gov. Glenn Youngkin that calls for “daily updates” to the state’s voter list in order to remove “individuals who are unable to verify that they are citizens” to Virginia’s Department of Motor Vehicles.

The timing of the voter removals under the order violated the NVRA’s “quiet period” restriction, Virginia’s challengers argue. In court filings, they also point out that the DMV data used to determine a voter’s U.S. citizenship status can be wrong or out of date.

Youngkin, in a statement, called the DOJ lawsuit “a desperate attempt to attack the legitimacy of the elections” in Virginia.

That was echoed by Trump, who has been pushing baseless allegations of widespread noncitizen voting while campaigning for a second term. Providing no evidence, Trump said in a post on his social media platform that the Justice Department’s legal challenge is one of “the Greatest Examples of DOJ Weaponization” that was done to “CHEAT on the Election” by putting “Illegal Voters” back on Virginia’s voter rolls.

Sponsor Message

Another potential legal fight over recent voter purges is brewing in Ohio. Voting rights groups led by the American Civil Liberties Union sent a letter dated Oct. 3 to Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose, a Republican, pointing to mass voter removals in some of the state’s counties that they argue did not follow NVRA requirements. The groups said they’re prepared to go to court if changes are not made within 20 days.

Edited by Benjamin Swasey
There’s been a considerable amount of interest in the 2024 race about the prospect of post-election political retaliations. Republican Sen. JD Vance of Ohio, however, has been eager to put voters’ minds at rest.

Over the summer, for example, the senator appeared on Fox News and said that Donald Trump is “not a vengeful guy,” all evidence to the contrary notwithstanding. This past weekend, Vance took the same line a little further, delivering this line on ABC News’ “This Week” with a straight face:

He [Trump] was president for four years, and he didn’t go after his political opponents. You know who did go after her political opponents? Kamala Harris, who has tried to arrest everything from pro-life activists to her political opponents … and used the Department of Justice as a weapon against people.

Look, I realize that Vance lies a lot. By some measures, he appears to have received tutorials from his running mate about how to deceive the public on a daily basis, and the lessons have gone tragically well.

But this is just straight-up gaslighting.

Let’s quickly discard the obvious absurdity that the vice president used the levers of federal power to target her perceived political foes. If Vance or anyone in GOP politics has any evidence to substantiate such a bizarre assertion, they’ve kept the proof well hidden.

The larger problem, of course, is Trump’s record that Vance is pretending to know nothing about.

There are basically three elements to the story that are worth keeping in mind: the recent past, the present and the near future.

In the recent past, Trump was in the White House, where he spent an outlandish amount of time and energy retaliating against perceived political foes — both in the political and private-sector realms — seeking meritless prosecutions against opponents. All of this has been thoroughly documented, and confirmed by officials who worked closely with him during his tenure.

In the present, Trump is a private citizen who lacks access to governmental power, but he has nevertheless tried to use his political influence to seek revenge — even against members of his own party.

As for the near future, the former president is effectively running on a retaliatory 2024 platform: Trump wants to prosecute his perceived domestic political enemies, and he doesn’t seem especially interested in hiding his intentions. On the contrary, he talks about his desire to abuse presidential powers all the time, even raising the specter of military tribunals for his opponents.

When The Washington Post pressed Vance’s aides for some kind of explanation, they said the Republican senator was referring to federal criminal indictments when he said Trump “didn’t go after his political opponents.”

But that also doesn’t make any sense, in part because there’s literally no evidence of Harris even trying to secure federal criminal indictments against her political opponents, and in part because there’s overwhelming evidence that Trump, while in office, went to great lengths to demand that prosecutors file charges against his perceived domestic foes.

In other words, Vance peddled a plainly false claim, which his team defended with another false claim.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
In an Alabama voting case in 2022, Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a concurring opinion attempting to justify a decision by the Supreme Court’s Republican-appointed majority. Now, just ahead of Election Day, a Georgia judge cited that Kavanaugh opinion in blocking a right-wing bid to have 2024 ballots hand-counted.

“This election season is fraught; memories of January 6 have not faded away, regardless of one’s view of that date’s fame or infamy,” Judge Robert McBurney wrote in his order Tuesday. “Anything that adds uncertainty and disorder to the electoral process disserves the public."

McBurney’s order paused the so-called Hand Count Rule passed by the Donald Trump-backed Republican majority of the Georgia State Election Board. The rule, which Democrats have said is an effort to delay or sow doubt about November’s election results, had been set to go into effect on Oct. 22.

“Perhaps for a subsequent election,” the state trial judge wrote of the hand-count rule, “after the Secretary of State’s Office and the 150+ local election boards have time to prepare, budget, and train — but not for this one.”

McBurney then quoted from the Trump appointee’s 2022 opinion (which Justice Samuel Alito joined), putting in brackets the Hand Count Rule to illustrate the point:

[S]tate and local election officials need substantial time to plan for elections. Running elections state-wide is extraordinarily complicated and difficult. Those elections require enormous advance preparations by state and local officials and pose significant logistical challenges. [Implementing the Hand Count Rule] would require heroic efforts by those state and local authorities in the next few weeks— and even heroic efforts likely would not be enough to avoid chaos and confusion.

McBurney concluded that “Because the Hand Count Rule is too much, too late, its enforcement is hereby enjoined while the Court considers the merits” of the case.The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported that “Without the hand count, voters can expect results to come in faster on election night than if they had to wait for poll workers to manually count ballots.”

It was the second recent ruling from McBurney rejecting potential election chaos sparked by Trump-backed Republicans, after making clear that certifying election results is mandatory.

But while Kavanaugh made a chaos-blocking cameo in this case, the full extent of the high court’s involvement in this election remains to be seen.

Subscribe to the Deadline: Legal Newsletter for expert analysis on the top legal stories of the week, including updates from the Supreme Court and developments in Donald Trump’s legal cases.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

The Secret Service released a blueprint on Wednesday that it says should help guide local and state law enforcement agencies to establish dedicated units that identify and stop tragedies such as mass shootings, assassination attempts and other targeted acts of violence before they happen.

The report from the Secret Service’s National Threat Assessment Center provides a suggested framework for police and law enforcement agencies around the nation to follow regardless of their size, funding or location and is meant to give them similar resources and methods already used by the Secret Service to detect threats.

Advertisement

Steven Driscoll, assistant chief of the National Threat Assessment Center, told HuffPost in an email that giving local law enforcement partners “a structured approach” to stopping mass violence means more communities will be safe.

In a response to a HuffPost question about why the agency has opted to release this report now, a spokesperson said it has been three years in the making and was only recently finalized. The report comes after two assassination attempts on former President Donald Trump this year and a marked uptick in political violence in recent years, with most of the violence emanating from right-wing groups and right-wing extremists.

Notably, groups such as Armed Conflict Location and Event Data, or ACLED, have pointed out that despite higher rates of political violence from 2020 to 2023 and sharp political polarization amid the 2024 election cycle, organized extremist violence has slowly dipped in some areas but has increased in others. This could be due to crackdowns on right-wing extremist groups after the U.S. Capitol riot on Jan. 6, 2021, as well as a shift in how the groups mobilize and organize.

Interestingly, the ACLED study points out that extremist groups have participated in about 10% of all pro-Trump demonstrations even though the events are roughly two-thirds less frequent than they were over the same period in 2020.

Advertisement

Ultimately, the recommendations are a bid to get more agencies on board with the creation of so-called Behavioral Threat Assessment Units that can “proactively identify and intervene” when people threaten violence to individuals, groups or places, such as schools, houses of worship and workplaces, according to the Secret Service.

The motivation for targeted violence is limitless and, because of this, the Secret Service emphasized in its findings that no specific demographic should be singled out to have an “attacker’s profile.”

Rather, the Secret Service is emphatic that the creation of behavioral assessment units cannot and should not rely on profiling of race, ethnicity, age or gender.

A U.S. Secret Service agent looks over the site before former President Donald Trump speaks at a presidential campaign rally on Oct. 5 in Butler, Pennsylvania, the same site where a gunman tried to assassinate him in July. Alex Brandon/Associated Press

Preventing mass violence is inextricably linked to law enforcement’s own “rapport building” and the ability to recognize “low threshold” warning signs.

Advertisement

According to the guide, a behavioral assessment unit can involve the gathering of information through interviews with a person or their family and community members, or reviewing a person’s social media and online presence.

As one district attorney put it last year when speaking to local reporters about an existing behavioral threat assessment unit in Wake County, North Carolina, a BTAU can help authorities figure out whether a person is “just mouthing off” or if they actually have the plans or the weapons they need to follow through with their threats, for example.

Existing behavioral threat assessment units operating with Department of Homeland Security oversight in Hawaii, Florida, New York and Washington, D.C., work with all manner of internal and external agencies or entities and experts to conduct and inform their behavioral assessments, the Secret Service noted. That includes experts such as psychologists or individuals with specific insights to that person or their community, like a local secular or religious group leader.

At its core, a BTAU is meant to spot “concerning behaviors,” including evidence of escalating interpersonal disputes, fixation on people or locations, stalking or harassment, the expression of suicidal ideation or self-harm and the idolization of past attackers.

For example, the report noted, parents might contact the unit with concerns if their 21-year-old son is driving to the state capital and they’ve noticed he’s recently become paranoid about the government spying on him and has said he wants to speak to the governor.

Advertisement

A behavioral assessment may be initiated under totally different circumstances, like if a person shows up at an old workplace after being fired or laid off and makes remarks about the boss getting what they “deserve,” or it could be prompted by reports of a person expressing frustration with the current political climate and saying they’d “rather die” than see the nation continue in its current state, the report said.

The behaviors worth investigating travel along a large continuum and are not just those that have a criminal nexus, according to the Secret Service.

As such, the agency offers guidance for standard operating procedures and protocols for BTAUs. Reporting must be anonymous and confidential, monitoring of the threats must be 24 hours a day and responses to all reports must be timely. On top of that, everything must take into account a person’s constitutional rights.

The Secret Service report recommends that BTAU investigators do more than compile profiles of would-be attackers; they should try to help them if needed.

A person who has raised the BTAU’s scrutiny should be asked if they are in need of employment assistance, substance abuse treatment or mental health treatment, for example. The Secret Service recommends then attempting to redirect their grievances. For instance, if it’s a workplace grievance, is there a way to help them de-escalate? If it’s bullying at school, is there a way to intervene?

Advertisement

From there, the agency recommends creating an environment in which violence is less likely to occur. This can mean limiting access to weapons, obtaining restraining orders, seeking GPS monitoring, getting support from family members, identifying counseling services and providing access to social services that address needs like food, medical care and housing.

The National Threat Assessment Center’s research found that 73% of all mass attacks in the U.S. involve firearms and that more than 29% of those attackers who used guns were subject to at least one federal ban on firearm possession.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Vem Miller, the man arrested on gun charges Saturday outside of a California campaign rally for former President Donald Trump, has sued Riverside County Sheriff Chad Bianco for defamation, saying Bianco’s claim that local authorities had “probably stopped another assassination attempt” was false.

The lawsuit, which named not only Bianco but also the County of Riverside and the Riverside County Sheriff’s Department, was filed Tuesday in federal court after Miller was taken into custody near the Coachella event over the weekend. Riverside officers had stopped the Las Vegas resident at a security checkpoint and allegedly found that he had firearms, as well as multiple passports and driver’s licenses with different names.

Advertisement

Bianco said Miller was driving an unregistered vehicle with a “homemade” license plate, and that his weapons included a shotgun and a loaded handgun with a high-capacity magazine.

Miller, a podcast host who in 2022 made a failed GOP bid for the Nevada State Assembly, was charged with possession of a loaded firearm and possession of a high-capacity magazine. He was briefly booked and then released on $5,000 bail.

After the arrest, Bianco told reporters that homemade license plates are “indicative of a group of individuals that claim to be sovereign citizens” — a term for a far-right movement whose members believe the U.S. government has no authority over them.

He also remarked, “If you’re asking me right now, I probably did have deputies that prevented the third assassination attempt” — a reference to the multiple apparent attempts on Trump’s life this year.

Advertisement

But on Sunday, federal authorities released a statement on the Coachella incident, saying that Trump was never in any danger.

On Monday, Miller told the Los Angeles Times that Bianco had “committed career suicide” by suggesting that the Las Vegas man, a self-identified Trump supporter, tried to assassinate the former president. Miller claimed that he’d brought weapons to Trump’s event for self-protection after receiving death threats for his work with The America Happens Network, his media company.

“As of right this second, I could prove everything they said is untrue,” Miller said. “It’s just going to be bad. He’s going to lose his job.”

In a video posted to the conservative-leaning website Rumble, Miller said that he was an “actual invitee” to the Trump event and had received a “special invitation from members of the Nevada Republican Party.”

Sigal Chattah, Miller’s attorney, likewise stated in Tuesday’s lawsuit that Miller was “provided expedited special entry passes by the Trump 47 campaign directly” — raising questions about how, or if, Miller received such an invitation to the Coachella event.

Advertisement

The Trump campaign, which seeks to elect the Republican as the 47th U.S. president, told HuffPost that there was “no record of [a] credential or press pass” issued to Miller.

Chattah, who also serves as a national committee member for the Nevada GOP, did not return HuffPost’s requests for comment.

HuffPost reached out to leadership of the Nevada GOP and heard back from only one member: Vice Chair Jim Hindle. Hindle said he had “no information” on who might have credentialed Miller or invited him to the event.

“Certainly not me,” Hindle said.

Speaking to NewsNation, Bianco elaborated on his thoughts about Miller following federal authorities’ Sunday statement.

“I can understand their statement of what they said,” Bianco remarked. “We arrested Mr. Miller before President Trump arrived, so there obviously was not a threat at that time.”

Advertisement

He added: “Of course he’s going to say he didn’t do anything and he wouldn’t have done anything, but it still doesn’t change the fact that we had to contact him for what we contacted him for, and he was on an inner perimeter with weapons.”

The sheriff lamented that the topic had been made “political.”

“Right now you’ve got Democrats attacking us, you’ve got Republicans attacking us, because they’re trying to stick up for someone that claims to be a pro-Trump person,” Bianco said. “It’s irrelevant. All that we know is it was my responsibility to keep that place safe, and he tried to bring guns to a rally.”

In addition to defamation, Miller accused authorities of invading his privacy. He argued that officers engaged in “deliberate and wrongful conduct” and violated his “constitutional rights for the purpose of promoting and engaging in a meritless and gratuitous sensational story.”
Other news outlets have retreated behind paywalls. At HuffPost, we believe journalism should be free for everyone.

Would you help us provide essential information to our readers during this critical time? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

With just three weeks to go until the presidential election, Donald Trump’s campaign has taken a strange turn.

The GOP nominee for president has never been one to play by the political rulebook, but his recent appearances have been especially bizarre: He’s swayed onstage to music instead of taking questions, trashed people he’s also trying to court as voters and spent precious time campaigning in solidly blue states, to name a few.

Advertisement

Here are some of the puzzling things he’s been up to lately in his race against Vice President Kamala Harris.

His town hall became a 40-minute musical tribute

During a Pennsylvania town hall Monday night, Trump abruptly said he was done taking questions and wanted to “just listen to music,” directing his staff to play “a couple of real beauties.”

What followed was nearly 40 minutes of Trump singing along, swaying and lightly dancing on stage to a cover of Leonard Cohen’s “Hallelujah” and Franz Schubert’s “Ave Maria,” along with various hits by Sinead O’Connor, Elvis Presley, Guns N’ Roses and the Village People.

Even Trump appeared confused at times about what was unfolding, remarking after one of the first songs that “there’s nobody leaving” and asked, “What’s going on?” The crowd seemed unsure whether the event was over.

Advertisement

Donald Trump’s town hall in Oaks, Pennsylvania took a very odd turn after two rallygoers had medical issues halting the program. Trump decided to stop the town hall questions and told his staff to just play music from his personal playlist. He proceeded to stay on stage listening… pic.twitter.com/kkjixXNzsg — MSNBC (@MSNBC) October 15, 2024

He inexplicably disparaged auto workers

Trump’s campaign has been aggressively pursuing support from auto workers in Michigan, the capital of American car manufacturing. But he threw all that out the window Tuesday when he diminished their jobs as simply taking parts “out of a box” and said the work was so easy a child could do it.

“They build everything in Germany, and then they assemble it here. They get away with murder,” Trump claimed during an appearance at the Economic Club of Chicago.

“They take them out of a box, and they assemble them. We could have our child doing it,” he continued.

He rattled off about Virginia when asked about Google

In another odd moment during his Chicago appearance on Tuesday, Trump responded to a question about whether Google should be broken up by saying he hasn’t “gotten over” the Justice Department suing the state of Virginia for removing people from voter rolls.

Advertisement

Then, when the interviewer reminded Trump that the question was about Google, Trump said the tech company “is very bad to me.”

“I called the head of Google the other day and said I’m getting a lot of good stories lately, but you don’t find them in Google,” Trump said. “I think it’s a whole rigged deal. I think Google is rigged just like our government is rigged all over the place.”

Donald Trump greets his supporters during a rally at Calhoun Ranch in Coachella Saturday. Wally Skalij via Getty Images

He canceled a planned appearance on CNBC

Joe Kernen, one of the hosts of CNBC’s “Squawk Box,” revealed on air Tuesday that Trump pulled out of an upcoming interview on the show.

Sources familiar with the original plans told The Daily Beast that the interview was supposed to happen later this week, until Trump abruptly canceled. A Trump spokesperson told CNN he canceled due to a scheduling conflict.

Advertisement

This marks the second time this month Trump has skipped out on a major interview. After canceling his appearance on CBS’s “60 Minutes,” he posted several angry rants on social media calling the century-old network “A THREAT TO DEMOCRACY” and demanding its broadcast license be revoked.

He’s been scheduling rallies in solidly blue states

While presidential candidates typically hold most of their rallies in swing states ― a political necessity of the electoral college ― Trump has been scheduling some of his final events of the election in solidly blue states like California, Colorado, Illinois and New York.

His decision to spend any amount of time and resources in states he has no chance of winning has baffled pundits.

He’s even repeatedly insisted that he’s going to flip his home state of New York even though no major polls indicate that. A Republican hasn’t won the state in 40 years.

He’s also been exaggerating crowd sizes at his blue-state events. After holding a rally in California’s Coachella Valley on Saturday, Trump boasted about having 100,000 attendees. While the exact number of attendees is unclear, a permit issued for the event reportedly capped attendance at 15,000.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

OAKS, Pa. — Even some of Donald Trump’s most die-hard female supporters wish he would sometimes just tone down his rhetoric.

“I just wish he would — God would help him — be careful with what he says. I think he should think a little more before he makes certain statements that upset people,” Joyce Cluley, 81, told HuffPost outside a Trump campaign stop in a suburb near Philadelphia on Tuesday.

Advertisement

And that’s to say nothing of all the other women that Trump is hoping to convince to vote for him over the next three weeks.

Female voters are one of Trump’s biggest electoral weaknesses; therefore, he is spending the precious final days of the campaign trying to repair his standing with women turned off by his years of ugly personal attacks and record repealing federal reproductive rights.

Fox News is scheduled to air a town hall Wednesday with Trump and an audience composed entirely of women, the campaign’s latest effort to address the wide gender gap in polls showing Trump lagging badly behind Harris among female voters. According to a recent Pew Research Center poll, 52% of female registered voters support Harris, while 43% support Trump.

It’s part of a push by both campaigns to shore up support from challenging constituencies in the deadlocked final stretch of the presidential race. The same day that Trump stopped in the Philadelphia suburbs, Harris stumped in Erie on the opposite end of the state at an event geared toward men. The vice president has released plans aimed at specifically courting Black men and is reportedly considering sitting down with comedian podcaster Joe Rogan, whose audience skews mostly male.

Advertisement

A Donald Trump supporter poses for a photo with his likeness in Oaks, Pennsylvania. According to a recent poll, 43% of female registered voters support Trump. Igor Bobic / HuffPost

The former president, who was found liable by a jury for sexual abuse, has deployed a group of female surrogates, including South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem (R) and Lara Trump, his daughter-in-law and chair of the Republican National Committee, and has proposed making the government or insurance companies cover the cost of in vitro fertilization. Trump is also casting himself as a “protector” of women without outlining any specific way he’d achieve such a status, beyond suggesting he would somehow free women from the desire to have an abortion.

“You will no longer be abandoned, lonely or scared. You will no longer be in danger. ... You will no longer have anxiety from all of the problems our country has today,” Trump said last month at a rally in Pennsylvania. “You will be protected, and I will be your protector.”

“Women will be healthy, happy, confident and free. You will no longer be thinking about abortion,” he added.

Harris, meanwhile, scoffed at Trump’s efforts to rewrite his record on reproductive issues, pointing to devastating consequences for women across the country since he appointed the Supreme Court justices who gave conservatives the majority to overturn the constitutional right to an abortion in 2022.

Advertisement

“There are now 20 states with Trump abortion bans, including bans that make no exceptions for rape or incest,” the Democratic nominee said on the “Call Her Daddy” podcast last week. “This is the same guy that said women should be punished for having abortions.”

In Georgia, for example, two women reportedly died after they couldn’t access legal abortions and timely medical care in the state, which passed a six-week abortion ban that is forcing women to leave the state for abortion services.

“There are too many women dying, literally just trying to bring babies into the world, especially Black women, three to four times the rate,” Georgia Sen. Raphael Warnock, a Democrat, said on a press call to preempt Trump’s town hall. “What we ought to be focused on doing is addressing that problem and not adding to it by the kind of national abortion ban that Donald Trump surely will bring into place.”

Warnock added at the end of the call: “We don’t need this serial sexual assaulter to protect women, women need to be protected from Donald Trump.”

Trump appears with South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem (R) at a town hall in Oaks, Pennsylvania, that quickly turned into a bizarre listening concert. Spencer Platt via Getty Images

Advertisement

Trump and other Republicans have sought to distance themselves from extreme anti-abortion policies following the Supreme Court’s repeal of Roe v. Wade in 2022. Trump disavowed Project 2025, the right-wing policy blueprint that includes a wish list of extreme anti-abortion proposals. Trump also suggested he won’t sign a national abortion ban from Congress if elected and won’t enforce an anti-obscenity law that abortion opponents want to use to criminalize sending abortion pills by mail.

Trump told Fox News on Sunday that a national abortion ban is “off the table,” but he left the door open to changing his mind, adding, “We’ll see what happens.”

Trump also has a long history of making disparaging and sexist comments about women, including bragging that “when you’re a star, you can do anything” to women on his infamous “Access Hollywood” interview and criticizing a Fox News anchor for having “blood coming out of her wherever.” More recently, he has turned his invective toward Harris, calling her “mentally disabled” and complaining about the “dumb women” hosts on ABC’s “The View.”

His running mate, Ohio Sen. JD Vance (R), hasn’t helped matters either, having repeatedly criticized “childless cat ladies,” including Harris, who he said are “miserable” with their lives.

Trump’s event near Philadelphia on Tuesday, which was initially billed by his campaign as a town hall but quickly turned into a strange listening concert — with the former president swaying and dancing on stage for nearly 40 minutes as he played his favorite music hits — drew many female supporters who said they didn’t mind his record on abortion. They wore pink shirts and hats emblazoned with the words “Women for Trump” and stood and posed for photos with his grinning likeness on a van outside the venue, a large expo hall.

Advertisement

“I think that we have bigger problems in this country right now than abortion. I think women are just making this a bigger issue — women, men — than it needs to be,” Sandy Alexander, a 61-year-old retiree from nearby Phoenixville, told HuffPost. “I mean, look, we’re here in Pennsylvania, you can get an abortion anytime you want.” (Abortion is only legal up to 24 weeks of pregnancy in Pennsylvania.)

Kim Statler, a 39-year-old neonatal intensive care unit nurse who works at an area hospital, said she agreed with Trump that abortion policy should be left up to the states. She insisted that women are “always going to be able to drive across the bridge to [New] Jersey and get an abortion. You’re always going to be able to drive to New York. You’re always going to be able to drive to Maryland.”

“I have no sympathies for that,” she added of women facing difficulties in getting abortion care.

But Tammy Solorio, 55, from Royersford, said she believed that Trump’s actions restricting abortion access would hurt him in the coming election.

“Women should have their own right to do whatever they choose. I don’t think that anybody should be able to say what you can and cannot do to your own body,” she told HuffPost.

“He has daughters, he should know what’s all about,” she added of the former president.

Nevertheless, Solorio said she was sticking behind Trump “because there’s so many other things that I agree with [him on],” including lower taxes and enforcement at the U.S.-Mexico border.

Advertisement

Trump supporters wait to hear the former president speak at a rally in Oaks, Pennsylvania. Igor Bobic / HuffPost

At the same time, Harris has been trying to court male voters by rolling out proposals to create new mentorship and training programs, protect cryptocurrency assets, and create a health equity initiative focusing on diseases that disproportionately impact Black men, like diabetes and prostate cancer. Her campaign has also deployed Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz (D), her running mate, to appeal to white men in rural areas.

Their outreach to men comes as voters view Harris as more likable and see her as having a stronger moral character, while they give Trump higher marks for being a “strong and decisive leader” who “can get things done,” according to a Gallup survey conducted this month.

“Women are not as strong as you think that we are,” Victoria Noey, a 69-year-old retiree from Norristown, told HuffPost on Tuesday as she waited to hear Trump speak in Pennsylvania. “I’m old-fashioned — my daughter would probably kick me in the head for saying that — I don’t know, I mean, there’s certain things that men are better off doing than women are, you know? Women are better off doing and taking care of families and, you know, doing all that stuff. And there are some men that do that, you know, which is great, let their wives work or whatever.”

“But things were so much simpler when I was a young girl,” Noey continued. “You have all of this like, back and forth and all this hatred. It’s sad, because this is supposed to be America, the land of the free, and I don’t feel free right now.”
LOADING ERROR LOADING

A super PAC engaged in a cynical two-step designed to simultaneously discourage Arab American and Jewish voters by advertising contrasting messages about Vice President Kamala Harris’ Middle East policies is being funded by a dark-money group that is bankrolled by right-wing tech and auto industry billionaire Elon Musk, according to a financial disclosure made public on Tuesday.

Here’s how it works: In areas of Michigan with large numbers of Arab and Muslim voters, Future Coalition PAC is running digital ads about how Vice President Kamala Harris is a staunch and unyielding supporter of Israel.

Advertisement

“Kamala and Doug, America’s pro-Israel power couple,” the narrator of one of the group’s ads declares after discussing Israel’s “noble fight against the radical terrorists in Gaza.” One mail item from the group says Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, “leans on Jewish husband Doug Emhoff to advise on high-level pro-Israel policies.”

Many Jewish Democrats have argued that, among other qualities, the ads’ focus on second gentleman Doug Emhoff is antisemitic.

That component of the advertising blitz reprises a well-known, though not exactly common, bit of campaign dark arts: Highlight a quality you claim to see as positive or negative, knowing the intended audience will have the opposite takeaway.

But it’s the second component of Future Coalition PAC’s advertising that really raises its cynicism to new heights. The group is simultaneously targeting Pennsylvania’s Jewish voters with advertisements claiming Harris has been “pandering” to Palestinians.

Advertisement

“In Jewish communities throughout America, questions are being asked: Why did Kamala Harris support denying Israel the weapons needed to defeat the Hamas terrorists who massacred thousands?” the 30-second spot says. “And why did Harris show sympathy for college protesters who are rabidly antisemitic?”

The ads aim to help former President Donald Trump by cleaving Jewish and Arab American voters away from Harris in key states at a time when both groups are deeply invested in Israel’s U.S.-backed wars in Gaza and Lebanon ― albeit usually for divergent reasons.

For voters curious about just who is funding Future Coalition PAC, the group’s disclosure to the Federal Election Commission on Tuesday offers some welcome, if incomplete, information.

The group’s $3 million budget so far comes entirely from a nonprofit, Building America’s Future, which is not required to reveal the names of its donors.

However, The Wall Street Journal reported earlier this month that Tesla co-founder Musk, one of the wealthiest men in the world and an occasional spreader of antisemitic conspiracy theories, is among the backers of Building America’s Future.

Advertisement

Musk has becoming increasingly crucial to funding Trump’s political operation and is also funding one of the major super PACs responsible for Trump’s get-out-the-vote efforts. According to a new FEC filing, Musk has given nearly $75 million to America PAC, the super PAC that has become a critical source of pro-Trump field organizing in the seven battleground states.

Tesla CEO Elon Musk joins former President Donald Trump at an Oct. 5 campaign rally in Butler, Pennsylvania. JIM WATSON/AFP Getty Images

The New York Times, which broke news of Building America’s Future’s role before the FEC filing became public on Tuesday and confirmed Musk’s role in the organization, also reported that Building America’s Future had raised about $100 million over the past four years and has roughly only a dozen corporate or individual donors. In keeping with Musk’s interest in alleged voter fraud, Building America’s Future offers people $5 million awards for evidence of “illegal voting” or other election-related abuses.

It also emerged Tuesday that Building America’s Future is funding Duty to America PAC, a super PAC that aims to peel young men and Black voters away from the Democratic Party.

“These ads demonstrate the Republican strategy of weaponizing hate and vitriol to divide Americans in order to achieve their political goals,” Halie Soifer, CEO of the Jewish Democratic Council of America, said in a statement. “These ads aim to drive a wedge between minority communities by exploiting bigotry and disinformation, and we condemn it in the strongest possible terms. It’s appalling and on brand for Donald Trump.”

Advertisement

Arab American leaders, however, have been critical of Harris for refusing to back any changes to President Joe Biden’s Middle East policies. Though Harris has expressed sympathy for the devastation endured by Palestinians in Gaza and support for Biden’s decision to withhold 2,000-pound bombs, she plans to continue granting Israel virtually all other American aid without additional conditions.

Future Coalition PAC’s advertising campaign is “very smart. It’s devious. It’s a kind of disinformation. It’s clearly designed to suppress Arab voters for Democrats,” said Jim Zogby, founder of the Arab American Institute. “And the problem is: Democrats don’t have a response.”

Zogby, who is backing Harris, has privately lobbied Harris to make some kind of policy gesture, such as committing to enforcing U.S. law prohibiting use of its aid for illegal purposes. He has a more modest ask, though, as well: that Harris publicly appeal to Arab Americans for their votes as even Sen. JD Vance of Ohio, Trump’s running mate, did when asked about it at a rally in Detroit last week.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Over the last few years, elections for public education officials have gone from overlooked and low-profile to heated and politicized affairs, a shift that’s due in large part to conservatives increasingly eyeing schools as places where they can wield significant influence and enact a specific agenda.

Moms for Liberty, a far-right group that popped up in Florida during the COVID pandemic and has since campaigned nationwide for a variety of conservative causes, is a significant driver of this shift. The so-called “parental rights” organization has thrown its support behind school board candidates across the country who have gone on to ban books, pass policies that hurt LGBTQ+ kids, and limit what teachers can do and say in their classrooms.

Advertisement

In 2022, more than half of the candidates endorsed by Moms for Liberty won their races, with those in Florida seeing particular success. But the following year, the group’s high-profile attempts in Pennsylvania were largely a dud.

This year, the group said it has identified 77 candidates for endorsements but has not publicly released the list.

“We continue to strive to have all voters across the country engage in their local school board elections and get to know the candidates because we know that change happens at the local level,” Moms for Liberty co-founders Tiffany Justice and Tina Descovich said in an emailed statement to HuffPost. “We have seen an incredible win rate the past two years that shows the power of our grassroots organization and we are excited to see that same kind of win rate this year.”

But even as the group keeps a lower public profile than it has during previous elections, its impact is clear. Across the country, far-right extremists are looking to get on school boards and reshape public schooling.

Advertisement

The blueprint for a right-wing, Moms for Liberty-style candidate has been made, and conservatives are following it. These candidates typically rail against “critical race theory,” a college-level academic framework for understanding structural racism that has been co-opted by conservatives to mean talking about race at all and making white people feel uncomfortable. They falsely claim books about gender or sexual identity are inherently pornographic. They may smear teachers as groomers, and make sure transgender children are targeted and ostracized at school.

Parental rights and fighting to keep trans kids from playing sports are now Republican talking points at all levels of government.

“The work of Moms for Liberty hasn’t been as visible. But the rhetoric they use and their candidates are very much visible,” Tamika Walker Kelly, the president of the North Carolina Association of Educators, told HuffPost.

In blue, red, and purple states alike, this election is shaping up to have dozens of hotly contested school board races that feature right-wing candidates going up against their more liberal counterparts and hoping to shape the next generation of public school students.

North Carolina

There is perhaps no state where more is on the line for public education than North Carolina. Some of the largest school districts in the state could end up with an ultraconservative majority, and the Republican candidate for the top statewide educational role attended the Jan. 6, 2021, rally at the U.S. Capitol and has no experience in education.

Advertisement

The Wake County school board, the state’s largest school system, is at the epicenter of the fight for North Carolina’s schools. Five of the board’s nine seats are up for grabs.

This isn’t the first time right-wingers have tried to influence Wake County schools. In 2009, after a Tea Party takeover of the school board led to the erosion of long-term integration policies, the Democrats took action and have managed to keep the school board liberal for the last decade and a half.

But now, Republicans in Wake County are trying to make inroads in the schools again. Conservative activists have tried banning books in the county and recently ginned up a moral panic about sexually explicit content in schools after a high school student claimed a book she read in class was inappropriate. (The book in question was “Tomorrow Is Too Far” by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, which depicts a relationship between cousins and has the line “he tried to fit what you both called his banana into what you both called your tomato.”)

To Democrats, the GOP vision is clear. “Their goal is to make public schools go away,” Kevyn Creech, the chair of the Wake County Democrats, told HuffPost. “They want to get rid of the Department of Education, make everything religious, and privatize it all.”

Democratic leaders are particularly worried because a Republican win for state superintendent, coupled with GOP victories at the county level, could create the perfect storm.

Advertisement

The state superintendent for public instruction oversees more than 2,500 schools in North Carolina and an $11 billion budget. The race is between Democrat Mo Green, the former superintendent of Guilford County schools, and Republican Michele Morrow, who homeschooled her own children.

After defeating the Republican incumbent in March, Morrow made headlines when CNN discovered that she had attended the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection with her children. (There is no evidence that she entered the Capitol building or committed any crimes.) She has also called for the execution of prominent Democrats and made a video saying former President Donald Trump should use the U.S. military to stay in power after he lost the election in 2020.

Morrow ran for school board in Wake County in 2022 and lost by 20 points. As a candidate for superintendent, she has lobbed homophobic and transphobic attacks at Green and vowed to rid the state’s schools of diversity, equity and inclusion programs and censor what teachers can say in the classroom.

Educators believe that a Morrow win will set the state’s schools on a dark path.

“Morrow and her extremist agenda will push our public schools further behind,” Walker Kelly said. “We will continue to see the further underfunding and disrespect of our public school system.”

The state superintendent would work closely with the Republican-led North Carolina General Assembly — meaning Morrow could wield influence over the schools and usher in her extremist agenda, which centers white conservative Christian ideology.

Advertisement

“As a department of the state, there’s still enough power to do damage to public schools,” Walker Kelly said.

South Carolina

In South Carolina, the school board race in Berkeley County, a Charleston suburb, is shaping up to feature right-wing candidates looking to further entrench a Moms for Liberty-style agenda against a slate of candidates who have branded themselves as the “education over politics” group. Five of the board’s nine seats are up for grabs.

Moms for Liberty has already made its mark in the county. In 2022, six of the new board members were endorsed by the group. One of their first actions was to fire the superintendent and ban critical race theory.

Last year, Angelina Davenport, a parent in the school district and a Moms for Liberty member, challenged 93 books in the Berkeley County school district, leading to a costly and time-intensive review of each book. Now she’s running for school board on a parental rights platform.

At a school board meeting, she said the books she challenged were “unconstitutional and ungodly.”

“Why is it acceptable to make choices for my child, choices I’m not included in, choices I do not agree with?” she said. Board members told Davenport was free to opt her child out of any material she found objectionable.

Advertisement

Maryland

Further north in Maryland, there’s yet another school board race with at least one extreme candidate.

In Anne Arundel County, home to the state’s capital of Annapolis, all seven seats on the board are open. One candidate, Chuck Yocum, is running on parental rights and barring transgender students from playing on sports teams that match their gender identity. His campaign website features a long screed about how public schools used to be good but have been ruined by teachers unions and the creation of the Department of Education.

“Unions, once held in high regard as fighting for fairness are fighting to take parents rights and put biological males in female locker rooms and sports,” he wrote. “Something that until about five minutes ago would have gotten a young man arrested. Now, it’s encouraged.”
A banner reading "Country Over Party" is seen as US Vice President and Democratic presidential candidate Kamala Harris speaks at a campaign event at Washington Crossing. RYAN COLLERD via Getty Images

In her strongest warning to date about Donald Trump’s autocratic tendencies, Vice President Kamala Harris on Tuesday quoted his own top military adviser’s assessment of him as “fascist to the core” in a speech inviting Republicans to join her presidential campaign.

“His national security adviser, two defense secretaries, his former chief of staff, his own vice president, all have warned America: Donald Trump is unfit to serve,” Harris said. “Or listen to General Milley, Donald Trump’s top general. He has called Trump, and I quote, ‘fascist to the core,’ and said, quote, ‘no one has ever been as dangerous to this country.’”

Advertisement

Mark Milley, who in 2018 was chosen by the then-president and the current GOP nominee as the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, made the remarks to Bob Woodward, who included them in his forthcoming book, “War.”

Harris was joined on stage by former Republican members of Congress — including Jim Greenwood of Pennsylvania, David Trott of Illinois and Barbara Comstock of Virginia. And she cited the support of former aides to Republican presidents and nominees stretching from Ronald Reagan to both George Bushes to John McCain and even Trump himself.

Harris delivered the speech in Washington’s Crossing, a village in one of the suburban “collar” counties of Philadelphia where college-educated Republicans who cannot abide Trump could provide Harris a winning margin in a crucial swing state.

It was the second time in as many days that Harris cited or agreed with the notion that Trump’s actions and views amounted to fascism, the autocratic style of rule associated with murderous 20th century dictators like Benito Mussolini, Francisco Franco and Adolf Hitler.

Advertisement

On Monday, radio host Charlamagne tha God described what he saw as the alternative Americans faced if they rejected Harris. “The other is about fascism,” he said. “Why can’t we just say it?”

She responded: “Yes, we can say that.”

Harris’ explicit overtures to Republicans reflect her campaign’s view that there are sizeable numbers of mainline GOP voters who have been repulsed by Trump over the last nine years, and particularly following his Jan. 6, 2021, coup attempt.

As more than a dozen former Republican elected officials and White House aides stood on stage, a local couple introduced Harris, saying that although they had previously supported Trump, she’d won their vote this year.

“Jan. 6 was the straw that broke the camel’s back for me,” said Bob Lange, who said his wife, Kristina, was “ahead of the curve” because she only voted for Trump once, rather than twice like he did.

Harris spoke in detail about Trump’s actions leading up to and on Jan. 6, including an element that has received little attention: what would have happened if Trump had had a more pliant vice president and his coup had succeeded.

Advertisement

“He sent a mob, an armed mob, to the United States Capitol, where they violently assaulted police officers, law enforcement officials, and threatened the life of his own vice president, and he refused to engage in the peaceful transfer of power,” Harris said. “Were it not for the courage and patriotism of Vice President [Mike] Pence that day, Donald Trump might have actually succeeded in overturning the will of the American people.”

She then tied Trump’s actions in the final days of his term to his new claim that Americans who oppose him constitute an “enemy from within” and his threat to deploy the U.S. military against them.

“Let that sink in — use of the American military to go after American citizens? And we know who he would target first, because he has targeted them and attacked them before: Journalists whose stories he doesn’t like. Nonpartisan election officials, who refuse to cheat by finding extra votes for him. Judges who insist on following the law instead of following him,” she said. “It is clear Donald Trump is increasingly unstable and unhinged. And he is seeking unchecked power.”

Harris again promised to include a Republican in her cabinet and govern in a more “practical” and bipartisan manner. She closed by quoting Ronald Reagan — the man who, before Trump’s election, had been revered as the most influential leader of the modern Republican Party — and Reagan’s own quote of Puritan leader John Winthrop.

“Imperfect though we may be, America is still that shining city upon a hill that inspires people around the world, and I do believe it is my highest forms of patriotism to fight for the ideals of our country,” Harris said.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Vice President Kamala Harris defended Detroit during an appearance Tuesday with nationally popular Black radio host Charlamagne Tha God just days after Donald Trump disparaged the key swing state city in a rambling speech delivered there.

“Can you imagine, you go to a city and you say you want the votes of those people, and then you disparage the city?” the Democratic nominee for president said during a special hourlong afternoon edition of Charlamagne’s syndicated morning show. “That’s what he did in Detroit.”

Advertisement

Harris’ appearance was designed to shore up her standing with Black men, who are among the several specific demographics targeted by the coup-attempting former president as he runs to regain the White House and stay out of prison.

Harris took questions from both in-studio guests of Charlamagne ― whose real name is Lenard Larry McKelvey ― as well as listeners who sent in questions remotely. The afternoon show was broadcast from Detroit, where Harris arrived late Monday on the first day of what will be an 11-day campaign swing through the seven states where the election will likely be determined.

Some questions were about her record as a prosecutor in California and the false claim that she had sent thousands of Black men to prison for possessing marijuana.

“It’s just simply not true. And what public defenders who were around those days will tell you is I was the most progressive prosecutor in California on marijuana cases,” she said. “Would not send people to jail for simple possession of weed.”

Advertisement

In fact, despite the “war on drugs” crackdown in the 1980s and 1990s, very few people were sent to prison for merely possessing marijuana, as opposed to selling it in large quantities or possessing it while committing a violent crime.

When asked whether Black people deserve reparations because of the wealth their enslaved ancestors generated for their owners and the nation but enjoyed no part of themselves, Harris said the issue should be “studied” but quickly pivoted to how her economic proposals, including a $6,000 child tax credit and a $25,000 grant to first-time home buyers, would help Black people.

And she received several questions about Trump’s autocratic statements of late, including saying he might use the U.S. military against Americans who oppose his policies.

Vice President Kamala Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, appears for an interview Tuesday with Charlamagne Tha God, co-host of "The Breakfast Club" radio show, in Detroit. Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press

A listener from Georgia asked Harris about Trump’s plan to round up millions of suspected illegal immigrants for deportation. “I have a sneaking suspicion that if Trump wins, he’s going to use this law to put anyone that doesn’t look white in camps, and I’m scared,” he said.

Advertisement

“You’ve hit on a really important point,” Harris answered. “He is achieving his intended effect ― to make you scared. He is running full time on a campaign that is about instilling fear, not about hope, not about optimism, not about the future, but about fear.”

She also returned to a theme she has been emphasizing since she became the Democratic nominee following President Joe Biden’s decision to end his reelection campaign in July: that Trump’s loud and domineering affect, designed to project strength, actually reveals the opposite.

“Donald Trump, through his way of trying to name-call and demean and divide, tries to project as though those things are a sign of strength when, in fact, the man is really quite weak. He’s weak,” she said. “This man is weak, and he is unfit.”

Trump denigrated Michigan’s largest city last week during a rambling, nearly three-hour speech at the Detroit Economic Club, where he suggested the city is crime ridden and dangerous. “Our whole country will end up being like Detroit if she’s your president,” he warned.

Leaders of Detroit and Michigan generally roundly pushed back against Trump, pointing out the city’s decrease in crime and improved economic condition in recent years, calling it a success story for other cities to emulate.

Advertisement

Charlamagne, who co-hosts a popular radio show called “The Breakfast Club,” went even further, saying that what Trump really meant was that electing Harris would make the country more “Black,” which in Trump’s view was obviously a bad thing.

“When Trump says the whole country is going to become like Detroit if she becomes president, he’s telling folks that they need to fear America becoming too Black,” he said on his radio show Friday, the morning after Trump’s speech.

On Tuesday, Harris agreed with that assessment. “He has a tendency to mention cities that either have a historically Black majority population or a Black mayor.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

College students who live and study in Wisconsin are legally allowed to register to vote and participate in elections with either their school or home address. But a “threatening” text message last week, flagged by two nonprofit groups, implied otherwise ― raising concerns about voter intimidation in a critical swing state.

“WARNING: Violating WI Statutes 12.13 & 6.18 may result in fines up to $10,000 or 3.5 years in prison,” reads the text message, citing laws concerning election fraud and voter eligibility. “Don’t vote in a state where you’re not eligible. STOP2END.”

Advertisement

“Thousands” of young voters across Wisconsin received the text on Oct. 10, according to a letter sent Tuesday to U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland and Wisconsin Attorney General Josh Kaul (D). The nonprofit group Free Speech for People sent the letter on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Wisconsin.

The text messages “targeted young voters aged 18-25,” including “many” who are part of the University of Wisconsin system, according to the letter.

“Many students and other young voters are fearful that they will face criminal prosecution if they register and exercise their right to vote ― because of a malicious, inaccurate text sent by an anonymous party,” the letter said.

Among the text’s recipients were young staff members at the League of Women Voters of Wisconsin, the letter said. A staff member at Democracy Docket, a voting rights news website founded by the Democratic election lawyer Marc Elias, also received a text, according to the group’s website. The Associated Press noted that at least one person who received the text posted a copy of it on X, formerly Twitter.

Advertisement

College students strongly support Vice President Kamala Harris over former President Donald Trump in this year’s election, polling has indicated, and their votes could be crucial in several swing states.

State law also allows Wisconsin residents who attend school out-of-state to vote absentee in Wisconsin. Similarly, out-of-state residents studying in Wisconsin are legally able to vote in Wisconsin.

The state election commission’s “guide to student residency” states: “Under Wisconsin Statutes, an individual must reside in an election ward for at least 28 consecutive days before the election and have no present intent to move. A person does not lose residency for voting purposes by leaving an established residence for temporary purposes with the intent to return to the residence.” (The document clarifies that voters don’t need to literally sleep at a single address for 28 days straight to be eligible.)

Registration rules and deadlines vary by state, but those rules are easy to check.

Wednesday, incidentally, is the last day to register to vote online or by mail in Wisconsin ― though eligible voters can register in person at clerks’ offices up until the Friday before the election, or at their polling places on Election Day.

The League of Women Voters of Wisconsin and Free Speech for People asked for a voter intimidation investigation on the state and federal levels.

Advertisement

“Wisconsin DOJ takes allegations of potential violations of election law seriously,” Gillian Drummond, a spokesperson for the state Department of Justice, told HuffPost on Wednesday. “Wisconsin DOJ is reviewing the information provided and will assess what if any follow-up is appropriate based on the facts and the law.”

The U.S. Justice Department did not respond to HuffPost’s request for comment Wednesday.

In their letter, the nonprofits cited a lawsuit brought in New York by the National Coalition on Black Civic Participation against Jacob Wohl and Jack Burkman, right-wing conspiracy theorists who used robocalls targeted to neighborhoods with large Black populations meant to intimidate voters in 2020.

“Mail-in voting sounds great, but did you know that if you vote by mail, your personal information will be part of a public database that will be used by police departments to track down old warrants, and be used for credit card companies to collect outstanding debts?” said the robocalls, which were sent to tens of thousands of recipients in several states. “The [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] is even pushing to use records for mail-in voting to track people for mandatory vaccines. Don’t be finessed into giving your private information to the man. Stay safe and beware of vote-by-mail.”

The New York attorney general’s office intervened in the case, and Wohl and Burkman were ultimately found to have violated the Voting Rights Act, the Ku Klux Klan Act, and New York civil rights law. They agreed to pay up to $1.25 million as a fine. Separately, the Federal Communications Commission fined them $5 million, and the pair were sentenced to 500 hours of voter registration by a judge in Ohio, where they pleaded guilty to telecommunications fraud. They still face multiple felony charges in Michigan.

“Parties that commit voter intimidation should not be allowed to hide behind technology or benefit from the anonymity of texting,” Tuesday’s letter to Wisconsin and federal officials read. “We urge your offices to promptly and thoroughly investigate these texts, make public the identity of the party or parties responsible for disseminating the texts, and take appropriate enforcement action against the perpetrators.”

Advertisement

“Wisconsin voters need to know that these threatening text messages are illegal and the League of Women Voters will fight against bad actors who seek to sow confusion in our elections,” Debra Cronmiller, executive director of the League of Women Voters of Wisconsin, said in a statement.
Arguably no state has taken more provocative pre-election steps than Georgia, where conspiratorial Republican officials on the Georgia State Election Board have recently created a series of unnecessary “reforms” that might very well create election-administration problems next month. That’s not, however, the only area of concern in the Peach State.

After the 2020 elections, several local Republican election board members refused to certify elections for a variety of assorted and dubious reasons, and there are plenty of concerns that there will be related tactics in this year’s cycle. It’s against this backdrop that a Georgia judge issued a ruling this week rejecting this as a possibility. The Atlanta Journal Constitution reported on Tuesday:

Certifying elections is a required duty of county election boards in Georgia, and they’re not allowed to refuse finalizing results based on suspicions of miscounts or fraud, a Fulton County judge ruled Tuesday. Superior Court Judge Robert McBurney rejected claims brought by Fulton County election board member Julie Adams, who voted against certifying this spring’s presidential primary. McBurney ruled that Georgia law requires certification, and county election boards don’t have any discretion not to do so.

“If election superintendents were, as plaintiff urges, free to play investigator, prosecutor, jury, and judge and so — because of a unilateral determination of error or fraud — refuse to certify election results, Georgia voters would be silenced,” McBurney wrote. “Our Constitution and our election code do not allow for that to happen.”

In other words, there might be legitimate questions in some areas in some elections, but as the state judge explained, it’s not up to local election boards to adjudicate those questions.

Tristan Snell, who provides legal commentary for MSNBC, described the ruling as a “huge victory for democracy” and a “huge defeat for Trump’s attempts to scuttle the election.” Several other legal and election experts praised McBurney's decision.

Indeed, my colleague Lisa Rubin published a report last month in which she characterized this case as one of the “most critical” trials of the 2024 election season. Lisa explained:

Imagine a world in which local election board members are empowered, through the guise of doing their own “research,” to delay or refuse the certification of county results. That could hold up the certification of the entire state’s results and even potentially its certificate appointing electors. And if that were to happen, Georgia’s missing electors would be subtracted from the total needed to win the electoral college. Put another way, the failure to certify thousands of votes could end up depriving the rightful winner of a presidency voted upon by nearly 200 million.

With this in mind, it’s a big deal that McBurney ruled that Georgia law requires certification, and the matter is not discretionary for members of local election boards.

The ruling, incidentally, coincides with the start of early voting in Georgia.
is a senior correspondent at Vox, where he focuses on the Supreme Court, the Constitution, and the decline of liberal democracy in the United States. He received a JD from Duke University and is the author of two books on the Supreme Court.

Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris speaks to the media before boarding Air Force Two after assessing the Hurricane Helene recovery response in North Carolina on October 5, 2024, in Charlotte, North Carolina. Mario Tama/Getty Images

Over the course of its last few terms, the Supreme Court has effectively placed itself in charge of the executive branch.

It’s given itself an extra-constitutional veto power over virtually any policy decision made by a federal agency. Even when it ultimately rules in favor of President Joe Biden’s policies, it often sits on those cases for months, allowing a lower court order to suspend Biden’s programs for as much as a year.

Meanwhile, the Court has done extraordinary favors for America’s only recent Republican president. Just look at the Republican justices’ decision to immunize former President Donald Trump from prosecution for criminal actions he committed while in office.

SCOTUS, Explained Get the latest developments on the US Supreme Court from senior correspondent Ian Millhiser. Email (required) Sign Up By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

The president, in other words, is increasingly subordinate to the courts. Yet, as the judiciary seizes more and more power, the battle over who gets to shape it grows increasingly lopsided.

Even if Harris wins by a large enough margin to overcome the Electoral College’s Republican bias, she still may not get to have much of an impact on the judiciary. Her presidency — and specifically her ability to name judges — is likely to be restricted by a Republican Senate. For Democrats to control even a tied 50-50 Senate, one in which Vice President Tim Walz would hold the deciding vote if Harris prevails, they must not just win in every single blue and swing state Senate race this year, but also Senate races in at least two of the red states of Ohio, Florida, Montana, and Texas.

That could happen, but it would require the kind of unusually triumphant Democratic election year that the party hasn’t seen since at least 2008 and possibly not since President Bill Clinton’s landslide reelection victory in 1996. And that seems quite unlikely.

A Harris victory could halt America’s slide into a MAGA-dominated future but it is unlikely to give her the power to reshape the judiciary in the way Trump was able to during his first term.

The Electoral College and Senate malapportionment has completely warped the judiciary

Along the way, the Court has pulled new legal rules out of thin air, then used these newly invented rules to nullify many of Biden’s most ambitious programs.

If the American people had voted for this agenda then it would be difficult to criticize the Republican Party for pushing it. But the electorate did nothing of the sort.

After 2016, Trump was in a position to nominate three Supreme Court justices not because most Americans wanted him to be president but because enough Americans in the right places did. The Electoral College system means each American’s vote is not equal: Hillary Clinton, after all, won nearly 3 million more votes than Trump in 2016, but still lost the presidency.

Trump had a Republican Senate willing to put his choices on the bench because Republicans have an enduring advantage in the upper chamber, one that makes it more difficult for Democrats to control the Senate. Each state, regardless of population, gets two senators.

These antidemocratic features of the US Constitution have been with the United States almost from the beginning, but they have an increasingly pronounced effect today, largely because the parties have sorted based on population density. People in cities and other densely populated areas tend to vote for Democrats, while outlying areas become more and more Republican as they become less dense.

That means that a system that effectively gives extra representation to the most sparsely populated states will unfairly favor the Republican Party. In 2021, for example, when the Senate split evenly between Democrats and Republicans, the Democratic “half” represented nearly 42 million more people than the Republican “half.”

Though the trend appears to be accelerating, this antidemocratic skew long predates the Trump presidency. Senate malapportionment has been one of the most consequential factors shaping US politics for decades. By some counts, if senators were distributed equally according to how the majority of Americans voted, Democrats would have controlled the Senate in every single year since the late 1990s.

Stephen Wolf/Daily Kos Elections

In that world, Democrats not only may have enacted more significant legislation, they would also almost certainly control the courts. Obama would have confirmed a justice to fill the vacancy created when Justice Antonin Scalia died in Obama’s last year in office, and none of Trump’s nominees would have likely been confirmed.

Similarly, while Republicans probably would have still filled some Supreme Court seats during the 1990s and 2000s, it’s unlikely that they would have successfully confirmed an ideologue like Justice Clarence Thomas or an unapologetic GOP partisan like Justice Samuel Alito if Senate seats were distributed fairly by population. In a fair Senate, Republican presidents would have to negotiate with Democrats to choose moderate nominees in the vein of, say, Justices Lewis Powell and Sandra Day O’Connor.

That is to say, the impact of recent population sorting is felt acutely in the courts. In all of US history, only three justices were nominated by a president who lost the popular vote and confirmed by a bloc of senators who represent less than half of the nation’s populace. All three of them currently sit on the Supreme Court; they are Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, Trump’s three appointees to the Court.

What a broken Senate means for a potential Harris administration

In the event that Harris wins the presidency but Republicans capture the Senate, we only need to turn the clock back less than a decade to predict what is likely to happen.

Obama’s final two years in office were the only two when Republicans controlled the Senate. And shortly after Scalia’s death in February 2016, Senate Republicans announced that they would confirm no one Obama nominated to fill that seat.

“This vacancy should not be filled until we have a new president,” then-Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell announced at the time. (Four years later, when Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s death allowed Trump to fill a vacancy in the final months of his presidency, Republicans abandoned the position they adopted in 2016 and swiftly confirmed Trump’s nominee.)

The GOP’s blockade on Supreme Court confirmations should have surprised no one who watched the Senate closely because Senate Republicans had already imposed a near-total halt on all confirmations to federal appellate courts, powerful bodies that hand down precedential decisions that determine what the law is in multiple states at a time. In Obama’s last two years in office, he successfully appointed only two judges to the appellate bench, and one of these judges was confirmed to a highly specialized, relatively nonpolitical court that primarily deals with patent law.

By contrast, President George W. Bush confirmed 10 appellate judges during his last two terms in office, during a period when Democrats controlled the Senate.

Similarly, during Obama’s last two years in office, he appointed only 18 judges to federal district courts, the lowest rank of federal judge who enjoys a lifetime appointment. That compares to 58 judges during Bush’s final two years in office, according to data from the Federal Judicial Center. In Trump’s final two years in office, when Republicans controlled both the White House and the Senate, an astonishing 121 district judges were confirmed, including some infamously partisan judges like Aileen Cannon and Matthew Kacsmaryk.

President Biden, for what it’s worth, has confirmed more than 200 judges thanks to Democrats’ narrow majority in the Senate, including a total of 116 since the current Congress took office. Over his entire presidency, he’s filled 44 appellate seats.

Without the power to confirm judges, Harris will have no way to dilute the influence of judges like Cannon or Kacsmaryk, and Republicans could easily refuse to confirm anyone to any judicial vacancy that comes open until the GOP regains the White House. Alternatively, Harris may be able to strike deals with Republicans to confirm a few of her preferred judges, but the GOP has a history of demanding a very high price to confirm even a single Democratic judge.

In 2014, for example, thanks in part to a now-weakened Senate process that allowed senators to veto anyone nominated to a federal judgeship in their state, Georgia’s Republican senators convinced Obama to nominate four Republican judicial choices — including a Republican appellate judge — in return for confirming only two Democrats. One of the Republican nominees was eventually dropped because his views on abortion, marriage equality, and the Confederate Flag offended Democrats, but Republicans still walked away with more confirmed judges than Obama did. Harris could very well find herself in a similar situation.

The problems for Harris likely wouldn’t stop there. Because Republicans continue to dominate the judiciary, Harris would likely spend her presidency watching her policies get struck down on dubious legal theories invented by GOP judges, much as the Supreme Court struck down President Biden’s student loan forgiveness policy despite the fact that it was unambiguously authorized by an act of Congress.

Democrats are starting to awaken to the threat of a Republican judiciary, but they haven’t yet found a solution to their constitutional problem

Absent constitutional reform, Democrats have good reason to fear a Republican judiciary for decades to come. A malapportioned Senate means that Democrats are increasingly defenseless against the GOP’s efforts to control the bench. In recent years, however, Democrats have become more aware of a GOP judiciary’s power to thwart their agenda and have started to try to explore ways around it.

Historically, elected Republicans have viewed the courts as a favorable issue that rallies their base, while Democrats have behaved much more cautiously. Many Republicans credit Trump’s decision to delegate judicial selection to the Federalist Society, a bar association for right-wing lawyers, and to release a list of potential Supreme Court nominees during his 2016 candidacy, for giving him enough support to prevail in that year’s election.

Biden, by contrast, began his presidency very reluctant to take on the courts. After many Democrats called for Supreme Court reform in the wake of the Senate’s disparate treatment of the Scalia and Ginsburg vacancies, Biden tried to take the wind out of the sails of reform by promising to appoint a commission to study the issue — and then filling the commission with Republicans and scholars who historically have not supported reform.

One of the most ambitious recent Supreme Court reform proposals, from Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR), includes a number of very aggressive reforms. Wyden’s proposal would make every justice submit to a tax audit each year, require a two-thirds supermajority for the Court to overrule an act of Congress, and gradually expand the size of the Court to 15 seats.

Yet, while these proposals show that Democrats are moving in a more court-skeptical direction than they were four years ago, they would not solve the structural problems with US democracy that gave us the courts we have today. And they have virtually no chance of passing, especially in a world where it is increasingly difficult for Democrats to win the Senate even when they convincingly win the national popular vote.

Realistically, turning the United States into a nation where every vote counts equally — and where each voter is actually able to shape the judiciary — would require rewriting its Constitution. Until that happens, Democrats like Harris will struggle to win elections even when most Americans support them. And Democratic presidents will increasingly be at the mercy of Republicans in both the Senate and the courts.
Kamala Harris is wooing Republicans in Pennsylvania Wednesday with a call for unity

toggle caption Rebecca Noble/AFP via Getty Images

Brittany Prime has spent the last several months talking politics with women a lot like her — women who usually vote Republican, and who find themselves uncomfortable with former President Donald Trump.

“For moderate, center-right women, it's always going to be the economy,” Prime explained. “So a lot of it is reminding them that Donald Trump is not the better path forward.”

Prime’s background is in Republican fundraising, but she says she couldn’t support her party’s nominee in 2016. So she co-founded Women4US, a group working to persuade Republican women to oppose Trump and back Vice President Harris.

Sponsor Message

They’re focusing on several hundred thousand women in the key states of North Carolina, Georgia and Pennsylvania.

At a pizza parlor in Montgomery County, Pa., one of the state’s key so-called “collar counties” outside Philadelphia, Prime says some women are afraid to tell their friends — or even their husbands — if they aren’t voting for Trump.

“You look at what Donald Trump said the other week at the rally, when he said, ‘Raise your hand if you're voting for Kamala Harris,’” Prime recalled, referring to a moment at a recent rally in Wisconsin when Trump asked for a show of hands.

“Actually, I should say don’t raise your hand,” Trump added. “It would be very dangerous. We don’t want to see anybody get hurt.”

Prime says that for many of the women she speaks with, those words resonate. Negatively.

“For women, that really seeps in,” she said. “So it's unfortunate and it's sad, but we're going to combat it in any way we can.”

They’re combatting it through phone calls and texting, and a message designed to appeal to mostly white, mostly suburban women who lean toward conservative policies.

For example, Prime says, in the first presidential election since the Supreme Court decision overturning decades of abortion-rights precedent, she’s framing the issue in terms of “reproductive freedom,” rather than focusing on abortion rights per se.

toggle caption Dominic Gwinn/AFP via Getty Images

The Harris campaign is also working to mobilize disaffected Republican voters through outreach in key states. Earlier this year, the campaign hired a former Republican Capitol Hill staffer to lead those efforts.

Sponsor Message

On Wednesday, Harris returns to Pennsylvania, this time with several high profile Republicans in tow, according to a senior campaign official who spoke anonymously to share planning for the upcoming event. It’s all part of the campaign’s efforts to engage with these voters and show that Republicans support the vice president, giving other conservative voters permission to do so, too.

Ann Womble is one of those voters. A former Republican Party official from Lancaster County, Pa., Womble says she changed her registration to independent when Trump was nominated in 2016. She’s now co-chair of Republicans for Harris in Pennsylvania.

Womble says some of the people she meets are relieved to talk to someone like her, and echo her concerns about Trump.

“You know, like, ‘I am tired of Donald Trump. And it's this whole thing that he does to us is exhausting,’” Womble said of what she hears when she speaks to voters.

toggle caption Jim Vondruska/Getty Images

As it will again Wednesday, the Harris campaign has been touting endorsements from multiple prominent Republicans, including former members of the Trump administration, national security and military leaders, and elected officials, including former Rep. Liz Cheney .

At an event in Montgomery County last week hosted by the Super PAC Democracy First, Cheney recounted the events of Jan. 6, 2021.

“It doesn't matter if you are a Democrat or a Republican or an independent. That's depravity,” Cheney told a crowd that gathered in a historic theater in Glenside, Pa., on Oct. 9.

"We can never become numb to that," Cheney continued. "Any person who would do those things can never be entrusted with power again."

For Don Keyser, who at 79 describes himself as a lifelong Republican, the message resonated.

“I'm ashamed to say I voted for Trump the last two elections, but I won't be voting for him this year,” Keyser explained. “January 6th is the day that broke the camel's back for me. What was done that day was reprehensible.”

When Harris rallies in Bucks County, Pa., on Wednesday, she’ll do so with those themes in mind: patriotism and unity.

She will reinforce her pledge to be a president for all Americans and the promise she’s made to include a Republican in her Cabinet if she wins.

Former Republican Rep. Adam Kinzinger plans to speak in support of Harris at the event. Other former members of Congress and elected Republicans will be there, as well. Harris is due to be introduced by Republican farmers in Pennsylvania who have been featured in Harris campaign ads.

Sponsor Message

The campaign itself, and political organizers, point hopefully to the success of former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, who drew double-digit support in several states — including Pennsylvania, which has a closed primary — even after dropping out of the Republican race.

Craig Snyder, director of Haley Voters for Harris, says he thinks Harris still has a chance to persuade undecided voters, unlike Trump.

“He is really at or near his maximum vote now. And so for his campaign, mobilization is the whole ball of wax. It's everything. Whereas Harris still has room to grow,” Snyder said.

Snyder’s group is trying to reach several million former Haley supporters and other center-right voters in swing states.

Sarah Longwell, executive director of Republican Voters Against Trump, notes that about one-third of Republican voters reject Trump’s lies about the 2020 election and accept that he lost.

“But we're also realistic about how tribal it is and how many voters, despite not liking Donald Trump on the Republican side, will still go along and vote for him,” Longwell added.

Still, she says, if Harris can win over just a small percentage of those voters, that could be enough to swing a state like Pennsylvania - and maybe the election.
It’s been three years since Bob Woodward’s last book chronicling the power games of the Washington elite—hardly a long interval, especially for an 81-year-old author. But that last book, Peril, published in 2021, was his third in just about as many years (following Rage and Fear).

Why the slowdown? Maybe he’s been waiting for the plot lines to play out. His last three tomes formed a trilogy about Donald Trump’s stormy, improbable presidency. Now we have War, about Joe Biden’s term so far (Woodward cuts off the story in July, with his decision not to run for reelection). It sports all the familiar Woodwardian trademarks—the anonymously sourced accounts of Top Secret meetings, the profanity-laced dialogue (in quotation marks, as if heard by a fly on the wall), the portrait of high politics as a clash of colorful characters: a fun, often compelling first (at times, second) draft of history.

Yet, compared with the previous volumes, this latest is in some ways more interesting (if a bit less sensational), and it offers a more (though far from completely) coherent narrative.

Woodward’s style of storytelling is more episodic than structural. Chapters tend to run for just a few pages. His mantra tends to be “And then … and then … and then … ” as opposed to “And so … and so … and so … ” Still, the stories here hang together, more than they usually do, because of their underlying thread—as the title suggests, the wars in Ukraine and Gaza, and how Biden and his team dealt with them.

Advertisement

For the most part, Woodward is impressed, concluding that they engaged in “genuine good faith efforts” to “wield the levers of executive power responsibly and in the national interest,” adding, “I believe President Biden and this team will be largely studied in history as an example of steady and purposeful leadership.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

This is an uncharacteristically bold assertion for any author, much less Woodward, who, throughout his 50-year career, has been the less judgmental half of the Woodward and Bernstein team that broke the Watergate scandal and brought down Richard Nixon. In a Playboy interview back in 1989, he admitted that analysis wasn’t his strong point; it still isn’t. But heading into his ninth decade, with nearly two dozen books under his belt, it seems he feels entitled—properly so—to render some verdicts from journalism’s high bench.

Advertisement

He dangled his new assertiveness in 2020, on the eve of that year’s election, when he wrote, as the last line in Rage, “Donald Trump is the wrong man for the job.” The next year, after Trump’s defeat, he ended Peril by musing, “What is your country? What has it become under Trump?”

And even in War, where Trump plays a cameo role as he mulls making another run for the White House, Woodward declares, just before touting Biden’s legacy, “Donald Trump is not only the wrong man for the presidency, he is unfit to lead the country.”

Related From Slate It Sure Seems Like Vladimir Putin Is Recalculating the U.S. Elections Read More

Earlier in the book, Woodward interrupts the narrative to recall a reception he attended in March 2023, where Gen. Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, one of the heroes (and, clearly, a main deep-background source) in Peril, approaches him in a state of panic about the prospect of a Trump revival. “No one has ever been as dangerous to this country,” the general exclaimed. “I glimpsed it when I talked to you … for Peril, but I now know it, I now know it. … We have got to stop him! You have got to stop him! … He’s a total fascist. He is the most dangerous person to this country! … A fascist to the core!”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Woodward concludes the digression: “I will never forget the intensity of his worry.” And so War, published on the eve of another election, is meant not only as a look back on the Biden years but a warning about the dangers ahead if Trump is allowed another four years in the White House.

Every Woodward book produces a few big headlines, and the biggest to emerge from War is, in fact, about Trump. As president, it seems, he secretly supplied Russian President Vladimir Putin with COVID test kits, at a time when they were in short supply on the home front. More eyebrow-raising, even after he lost the election, Trump continued to talk with Putin, as many as seven times.

Advertisement

This truly is worthy of headlines. Woodward doesn’t know what the two talked about because Trump told the aide who set up the call—presumably the source of this tale—to leave the room once Putin came on the line. The full scope of Trump’s bromance with the Russian dictator remains mysterious; the fact that they continue to talk heightens suspicions. More than that, these conversations are illegal. Trump’s running mate J.D. Vance dismissed the story, saying at a campaign rally, “Even if it’s true, is there something wrong with speaking to world leaders? No. Is there anything wrong with engaging in diplomacy?” He seems to be ignorant of the Logan Act, which forbids U.S. citizens, much less political rivals, from unauthorized contact with foreign leaders.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

This titillating bit aside, the book’s most interesting sections deal with what it purports to be about—the wars. Woodward uncovers intriguing new facts about the conflicts or, at times, adds color and dimension to stories that others have reported in mere bits and pieces.

For instance, he writes that, in October 2021, four months before Putin invaded Ukraine, the United States gathered “exquisite” intelligence, from a “human source inside the Kremlin,” that the Russians were preparing a multifront assault and that Putin intended to follow through. The intelligence was a major coup for Biden’s intel officials—more detailed and high-level than they had ever seen before.

Advertisement

However, there was a dark side to this treasure trove—intel of “conversations inside the Kremlin,” that Putin thought he could get away with the invasion in part because of Biden’s “chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan.” This, of course, is an oft-repeated charge leveled at Biden by Republican critics. It turns out, according to Woodward’s sources (who seem to be high-level Biden officials) that this critique has basis.

Advertisement

Putin was all the more overconfident because of the lack of any serious resistance he received after annexing Crimea and sending special forces into the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine back in 2014. “The West’s response was slow, weak, and divided,” Woodward writes. “The intelligence indicated Putin was expecting much the same this time.” In one of the book’s scenes, which takes place soon after the invasion, Biden complains to a “close friend” about the Obama administration’s failure to act more forcefully. “They fucked up in 2014,” Biden yells. “That’s why we are here. … Barack never took Putin seriously. We did nothing. We gave Putin a license to continue.” (Woodward doesn’t say so, but as Obama’s vice president, Biden—along with much of the NSC staff—argued strenuously but unsuccessfully for sending Ukraine anti-tank missiles, thinking that, in order to be deterred from invading more deeply, Putin needed to see some body bags coming back to Russian bases.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Biden did respond to the invasion (as he told his friend, “I’m revoking [Putin’s] fucking license”) while striking a difficult balance: refusing to insert U.S. troops (which would set off World War III) but providing the Ukrainian army with intelligence and arms, while rallying the Western world to do the same, even encouraging Finland and Sweden—which had long observed neutrality in East-West affairs—to join NATO. (This is new, too: that enlarging NATO to include those two neighbors of Russia was Biden’s idea.)

Advertisement

Woodward also reveals that concerns over the possibility of an escalation to nuclear war were not merely hypothetical. In late September 2022, he writes, “new highly sensitive credible” intelligence—again, based on “conversations inside the Kremlin”—showed that Putin “was seriously considering using a tactical nuclear weapon” to avoid a major Russian defeat on the battlefield.

Advertisement

Biden stepped into gear. He spoke with Putin directly, warning him of “catastrophic consequences” if this happened. He also encouraged Chinese President Xi Jinping to put pressure on Putin, which he did. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin did the same with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu.

Another intriguing bit: Biden had said “privately” that, if Putin used tactical nukes on the Ukrainian battlefield, the U.S. “would not respond with nuclear weapons.” Instead, the “catastrophic consequences” would include isolating Russia throughout the world and, more promptly, using America’s vast conventional military power to wipe out Russia’s troops and weapons inside and near Ukraine.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Intelligence showed Putin soon backing away from the nuclear option, though Woodward notes that one reason may have been the fact that, over the next few months, the battlefield stabilized—Russia no longer faced the threat of a dreadful defeat. So who knows what might happen if the balance tipped Kyiv’s way again.

Advertisement

The Middle East takes up the bulk of the book, including its most dramatic scenes and the closest that Woodward comes to trenchant (dare I haul out the A-word?) analysis. The story he outlines—Hamas’ murderous attack of Oct. 7, Israel’s excessive counterblows, the talks (at first productive, then futile) over a cease-fire and a hostage-for-prisoner exchange, the widening of the war to include Hezbollah, the Houthis, and Iran—will be familiar to any follower of the news. But Woodward fleshes out the conflict (military and political) and adds details.

Advertisement

Biden’s longtime frustration with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is well known. Here it’s dramatized. “What the fuck, Bibi?” Biden says in opening a phone conversation after Israel bombs a target in Beirut. “He’s a bad fucking guy. … He’s a fucking liar,” Biden tells a friend after Netanyahu once again ignores his pleas to minimize civilian casualties in Gaza. One Saturday afternoon, he calls a friend to unload his anger: “I have spent almost five hours going back and forth, back and forth on the phone, with two of the biggest fucking assholes in the world—Bibi Netanyahu and Mahmoud Abbas [the head of the Palestinian Authority]. The biggest fucking assholes in the world!”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Still, Woodward goes beyond these great anecdotes, which one can imagine him underlining three times after transcribing them in his notebook. He also does something he has often neglected to do in previous books: He supplies context. For all his weariness, Biden has refused to stop supplying Israel with weapons because he knows that, if he made that move, U.S. support of Israel’s basic defense—its right to exist—would seem wobbly and that Iran would take the cutoff as a signal to escalate.

At the same time, Woodward describes the dilemmas faced by the leaders of Israel’s Sunni Arab neighbors. Biden sends Vice President Kamala Harris on a tour to talk with those leaders, and she concludes in a report that all of them detest Hamas and would love to improve relations with Israel—which they see as a powerful ally in their main rivalry with Iran and its Shiite proxies—but they can’t say so without alienating their own people, who take pro-Palestinian rhetoric more seriously than the leaders do; nor can they deepen relations with Israel until there is peace in Gaza and at least a pretense of resuming talks toward a Palestinian state.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Similarly, Brett McGurk, Biden’s chief emissary to the Middle East, tells Woodward that, several times during the cease-fire talks, Hamas’ political leaders, who live in Qatar or Egypt, agreed to a deal—but they had to get approval from Hamas’ real leader, Yahya Sinwar, who has remained hiding in the Gazan tunnels and who rejected every overture.

Woodward probably hoped to finish the book with the celebratory fireworks of a peace deal, especially if some of his sources—particularly Secretary of State Antony Blinken and national security adviser Jake Sullivan—were telling him what they were telling the rest of us over the last several months: that they were very close to a deal.

But it was not to be, and Woodward reports that Biden knew it. Once, earlier this year, after Blinken returned from Israel, enthusiastic that Netanyahu seemed on the verge of accepting a compromise, Biden waved the idea away. “Oh, come on,” he tells his longtime aide, “there’s no way he can do what’s necessary now.” As Woodward puts it, “Biden’s bullshit detector was blinking red.”

Advertisement

And so, Woodward leaves things till the next volume, where either Donald Trump resumes his rampage against the country and the world, or Harris takes the reins. Woodward probably had to rewrite his final chapters after Harris took over as the Democratic candidate. He does note that Biden included Harris in “almost all” of his calls with Netanyahu, and sent her on far-from-trivial diplomatic missions not just to the Sunni Arab leaders but also to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky and French President Emmanuel Macron.

But one message of this book is that the world, especially the Middle East, is a messy place, and no countries—not even former superpowers—have a lot of leverage over its flailings. Biden and his people are talented and well-meaning, but they couldn’t close the deal. Who knows what happens next.
CNN —

Kamala Harris is responding to Democratic panic about her White House prospects by turning up the heat on Donald Trump.

The vice president warned Monday that the ex-president was “unstable,” “unhinged” and out for “unchecked power” as she sent a jolt of urgency though her campaign with 21 days to go.

“Watch his rallies. Listen to his words. He tells us who he is, and he tells us what he would do if he is elected president,” Harris told a large crowd in Pennsylvania after a weekend when Trump’s authoritarian rhetoric reached chilling new levels and hinted at the extreme nature of his potential second term.

Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Walz, meanwhile, went even further, suggesting the ex-president’s musings about using the military against domestic foes he branded “the enemy from within” could even amount to treason.

Harris and her team also aggressively questioned Trump’s mental fitness and his capacity to serve another term, turning the tables on the Republican nominee who for months leveled similar charges at President Joe Biden.

In another effort by Harris to ease concerns about her apparently stalled momentum, she announced a major new initiative to court Black male voters amid anxiety that Trump is making inroads into a critical Democratic support base or that they simply won’t turn out.

And in a new ad campaign in swing state Arizona, Harris made fresh attempts to win over Republicans alienated by the ex-president’s behavior but who have yet to make what is for many a wrenching decision to cross party lines. To that end, Harris also announced that she’d sit down for her first formal interview with Fox News, dropping her earlier reticence over unscripted events to create a contrast with Trump, who rarely leaves the conservative media bubble.

Former President Donald Trump holds a town hall in Oaks, Pennsylvania, on October 14, 2024. Spencer Platt/Getty Images

A battle for Pennsylvania

Harris’ new efforts to dictate the pace of the election’s endgame came as both candidates campaigned in opposite corners of Pennsylvania. The commonwealth’s 19 electoral votes could well decide who wins the White House and, like a handful of other battlegrounds, it’s a toss-up according to latest polls.

Harris is entering the decisive stretch of her political life. Her actions under the most intense pressure in the next three weeks will be watched by remaining voters who’ve yet to make up their minds and may be looking for a reason to pick her. She needs to also energize wavering or unenthusiastic Democratic-leaning voters who may not show up on Election Day.

More broadly, the vice president faces one of the most daunting political assignments in decades, after taking over from Biden as the Democratic candidate months before the election. She’s trying to convince a disgruntled electorate that she’s a change candidate despite being part of an unpopular administration, while trying to take down Trump, who has shown there is almost nothing he won’t do to win back power.

Yet Harris’ efforts to close the deal against the former president are being complicated by his refusal to meet her for a second debate after her strong performance in their first showdown in September gave her campaign a boost.

An image of former President Donald Trump appears on screen as Vice President Kamala Harris speaks during a campaign rally in Erie, Pennsylvania, on October 14, 2024. Jacquelyn Martin/AP

‘You heard his words’

In a new section of her stump speech, Harris played a tape for her rowdy crowd in Erie featuring Trump’s comment on Fox News’ “Sunday Morning Futures” that he could turn the National Guard or regular military on “the enemy from within.”

“You heard his words,” Harris said. “He’s talking about the enemy within Pennsylvania … he considers anyone who doesn’t support him or who will not bend to his will an enemy of our country.” The vice president added: “Donald Trump is increasingly unstable and unhinged, and he is out for unchecked power.”

Just before Harris spoke, her running mate unveiled the Democratic ticket’s most explicit assessment yet of Trump’s potential threat to basic political freedoms if he wins a second term. Walz, the Minnesota governor, said the idea a president could use troops against Americans made him “sick to my stomach.”

And the Army National Guard veteran highlighted a comment by the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley that Trump was a “fascist to his core,” which was reported in Bob Woodward’s new book “War.” Walz added: “Let that sink in, and don’t be a damn bit afraid of saying it, because that’s exactly who he is. That’s exactly who he is.”

Trump’s vice presidential nominee JD Vance, however, defended his boss’ remarks. “Is it a justifiable use of those assets if they’re rioting and looting and burning cities down to the ground? Of course it is. Right?” the Ohio senator said in Minneapolis. “I think the question is, is it a justifiable use of assets? Depends on what’s actually happening.”

Video Ad Feedback Why former defense secretary fears Trump would try to utilize military against US citizens 03:28 - Source: CNN

Intensifying Democratic rhetoric about Trump comes as Democrats begin to consider the implications of the ex-president winning a toss-up election and securing a second term that is likely to be even less restrained that his first. Former President Barack Obama set the tone during his own swing through Pennsylvania last week.

Harris suggested in an interview with Roland Martin that Trump had something to hide. “He will not debate me again. I’ve put out my medical records, he won’t put out his medical records. And you have to ask, why is his staff doing that? And it may be because they think he’s just not ready, and unfit, and unstable, and should not have that level of transparency for the American people.”

In an appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” second gentleman Doug Emhoff raised questions about the 78-year-old former president’s mental and physical condition. Like his wife did, he noted that Trump had backed out of a “60 Minutes” interview and said, “It’s just obvious by looking at him, listening to him, you can see the degradation in front of your eyes.”

He added: “He’s a degrading version of an already horrible person so he’s just getting worse and worse.”

Vice President Kamala Harris greets the crowd at a rally, in Erie, Pennsylvania, on October 14, 2024. Evelyn Hockstein/Reuters

A critical county that could decide the election

At her rally in Erie, Harris put on an energetic show that looked like an attempt to ease Democratic anxiety that the momentum she built up after taking over from Biden in July has not translated into a clear lead over the ex-president.

“We will win. We will win,” she insisted with a beaming smile.

Erie County, in far northwestern Pennsylvania, is a study in miniature of the wider strategic nationwide battle facing Harris and Trump in the next three weeks. Biden won the county by 1 percentage point in 2020, but the former president carried the county by nearly 2,000 votes in 2016 on the way to the White House. The city of Erie is a Democratic stronghold, but the fight between Harris and Trump will be intense among moderate voters in the suburbs and Trump will seek to run up huge margins in rural and farming communities.

The twice-impeached former president appeared at a town hall event in Oaks, northeast of Philadelphia, with South Dakota Gov. Kristi Noem, who is a star in the conservative media firmament.

The event highlighted issues like the cost of living and housing that Trump’s team sees as the key to the election. One of the most critical questions before undecided voters in the coming days is whether pressures bearing down on many American families — for instance, over high grocery prices – will outweigh concerns about Trump’s extremism and threats to democracy.

Harris was not the only candidate tending to a vital constituency on Monday. (She unveiled a plan to boost access to finance for Black men who want to start businesses and a health initiative to increase screenings for conditions that disproportionately affect the community). Trump sought to make inroads with young men who are often low-propensity voters but who could add to his coalition.

He appeared on the Nelk Boys’ “Full Send” podcast, which has more than 2 million subscribers on YouTube, and chatted authoritatively about UFC martial arts stars in exchanges that displayed the kind of authenticity many voters like. He also appeared to confirm that he would appear on Joe Rogan’s hugely popular podcast in the latest example of how both he and Harris are seeking out non-traditional media sources to reach Americans who often don’t vote.
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken speaks at a press conference during the 44th and 45th Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Summits in Vientiane on October 11, 2024. (Photo by TANG CHHIN SOTHY / POOL / AFP) (Photo by TANG CHHIN SOTHY/POOL/AFP via Getty Images) TANG CHHIN SOTHY via Getty Images

WASHINGTON (AP) — The Biden administration has warned Israel that it must increase the amount of humanitarian aid it is allowing into Gaza within the next 30 days or it could risk losing access to U.S. weapons funding.

Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin warned their Israeli counterparts in a letter dated Sunday that the changes must occur. The letter, which restates U.S. policy toward humanitarian aid and arms transfers, was sent amid deteriorating conditions in northern Gaza and an Israeli airstrike on a hospital tent site in central Gaza that killed at least four people and burned others.

Advertisement

A similar letter that Blinken sent to Israeli officials in April led to more humanitarian assistance getting to the Palestinian territory, State Department spokesman Matthew Miller said Tuesday. But that has not lasted.

“In fact, it’s fallen by over 50% from where it was at its peak,” Miller said at a briefing. Blinken and Austin “thought it was appropriate to make clear to the government of Israel that there are changes that they need to make again, to see that the level of assistance making it into Gaza comes back up from the very, very low levels that it is at today.”

For Israel to continue qualifying for foreign military financing, the level of aid getting into Gaza must increase to at least 350 trucks a day, Israel must institute additional humanitarian pauses and provide increased security for humanitarian sites, Austin and Blinken said in their letter. They said Israel had 30 days to respond to the requirements.

“The letter was not meant as a threat,” White House national security spokesman John Kirby told reporters. “The letter was simply meant to reiterate the sense of urgency we feel and the seriousness with which we feel it, about the need for an increase, a dramatic increase in humanitarian assistance.”

Advertisement

An Israeli official confirmed a letter had been delivered but did not discuss the contents. That official, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss a diplomatic matter, confirmed the U.S. had raised “humanitarian concerns” and was putting pressure on Israel to speed up the flow of aid into Gaza.

The letter, which an Axios reporter posted a copy of online, was sent during a period of growing frustration in the administration that despite repeated and increasingly vocal requests to scale back offensive operations against Hamas, Israel’s bombardment has led to unnecessary civilian deaths and risks plunging the region into a much wider war.

“We are particularly concerned that recent actions by the Israeli government, including halting commercial imports, denying or impeding 90 percent of humanitarian movements” and other restrictions have kept aid from flowing, Blinken and Austin said.

The Biden administration is increasing its calls for its ally and biggest recipient of U.S. military aid to ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza while assuring that America’s support for Israel is unwavering just before the U.S. presidential election in three weeks.

Funding for Israel has long carried weight in U.S. politics, and Biden said this month that “no administration has helped Israel more than I have.”

Advertisement

Humanitarian aid groups fear that Israeli leaders may approve a plan to seal off humanitarian aid to northern Gaza in an attempt to starve out Hamas, which could trap hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who are unwilling or unable to leave their homes without food, water, medicine and fuel.

U.N. humanitarian officials said last week that aid entering Gaza is at its lowest level in months. The three hospitals operating minimally in northern Gaza are facing “dire shortages” of fuel, trauma supplies, medications and blood, and while meals are being delivered each day, food is dwindling, U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric said.

“There is barely any food left to distribute, and most bakeries will be forced to shut down again in just days without any additional fuel,” he said.

The U.N. humanitarian office reported that Israeli authorities facilitated just one of its 54 efforts to get to the north this month, Dujarric said. He said 85% of the requests were denied, with the rest impeded or canceled for logistical or security reasons.

COGAT, the Israeli body facilitating aid crossings into Gaza, denied that crossings to the north have been closed.

Advertisement

U.S. officials said the letter was sent to remind Israel of both its obligations under international humanitarian law and of the Biden administration’s legal obligation to ensure that the delivery of American humanitarian assistance should not be hindered, diverted or held up by a recipient of U.S. military aid.

Israel’s retaliatory offensive since the Oct. 7, 2023, attacks by Hamas has killed over 42,000 people in Gaza, according to the territory’s Health Ministry. It does not differentiate between fighters and civilians but has said a little more than half the dead are women and children. The Hamas attacks killed some 1,200 people in Israel, mostly civilians, and militants abducted another 250.

The United States has spent a record of at least $17.9 billion on military aid to Israel since the war in Gaza began and led to escalating conflict around the Middle East, according to a report for Brown University’s Costs of War project.

That aid has enabled Israel to purchase billions of dollars worth of munitions it has used in its operations against Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon. However, many of those strikes also have killed civilians in both areas.

___
When Kamala Harris gave her campaign’s biggest economic speech yet in Pittsburgh last month, she tried to keep everyone in her party happy.

She did not succeed.

Attempting to strike a balance between progressive and pro-business themes, Harris said she’d hold corporations accountable if they didn’t play by the rules — but opined that “most companies are working hard to do the right thing.” She referenced the activist presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt, but in calling for “experimentation” rather than sweeping transformational change. Rather than being “constrained by ideology,” Harris said, she’d seek “practical solutions to problems” and “applying metrics to our analysis.”

The speech had little populist fire to be found, and, coming amid extensive courting of Wall Street and Silicon Valley donors by Harris’s team, it set off alarm bells among some on the left. “My God,” the progressive economist Hal Singer wrote on X afterward. “We lost Kamala.”

The “we” is an alliance of advocates that has, over the past 10 years, come together in a surprisingly successful project to reshape the Democratic Party’s economic agenda. Some wanted to take on Big Tech and Big Business. Others wanted the government to revive US manufacturing, while ditching free trade and getting tougher on China. And others wanted big new spending on social policy.

But these advocates joined to fight a common enemy: neoliberalism. They sought to discredit the pro-free market and government-skeptical assumptions — and some of the specific people — that they argue drove economic policy in the Clinton and Obama years. The status quo, they believed, had hurt the American people and backfired on Democrats electorally.

In both the inside game of Democratic Party politics and the outside “war of ideas,” these post-neoliberals triumphed during the Trump and early Biden years — converting many party elites to their cause, securing key appointments, and shaping what became known to some as the New Progressive Economics.

The reformers went from irrelevant underdogs to well-organized, well-funded practitioners of hardball power politics shaping national policy. “This was an astonishing success, a seizure of some of the commanding heights of policymaking,” the historian Quinn Slobodian wrote in 2022.

Harris’s ascent has thrown all this into question. Some are urging Harris to undo some of Biden’s changes and steer the party closer to where it was in the Obama years — for instance, by being less hostile to Big Business and Big Tech. These critics point to Biden’s unpopularity, arguing that the new agenda has been tried and failed.

So far, Harris’s team has tried to keep both the reformers and their critics happy, sending signals to each camp suggesting she’s with them. But for now, winning is her top priority. “I don’t think she has an economic philosophy, and I don’t think she wants to have one until she wins the election,” one advocate in close contact with the campaign told me. (This article is based on conversations with policy experts, advocates, and former government officials, several of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity to speak more freely.)

But Harris and her party will have to choose a path forward if she wins. And understanding the present crossroads requires reckoning with why Democrats adopted this agenda in the first place.

Did the New Progressive Economics rise due to fundamental political shifts — or was it something of a fluke in a historical moment that has now passed?

And, on both the politics and the substance: Did it succeed, or did it fail?

“A credible threat and pain inflicted”: How Elizabeth Warren became impossible for the party establishment to ignore

The transformation of the Democratic Party began during Barack Obama’s second term, when some progressive thinkers and activists’ disappointment and frustration with his administration boiled over.

The country had recovered from the Great Recession, but slowly. Banks were now somewhat more regulated, but Obama hadn’t fundamentally transformed the finance sector or punished bankers with prosecutions. Progressive critics believed this was because Obama’s top appointees, like Larry Summers and Tim Geithner, were too sympathetic to finance and too beholden to the old economic establishment’s thinking.

Protesters march to Los Angeles City Hall during an “Occupy Los Angeles” demonstration in 2011 in Los Angeles, California. Getty Images

The critics argued that there were far deeper problems with the US economy that required far more sweeping change. But what change, exactly? Inspired in part by Occupy Wall Street and its “We are the 99 percent” slogan, “inequality” became a new funding priority of progressive donors and foundations. “There was an understanding starting to form that the economy wasn’t delivering,” Felicia Wong, president of the Roosevelt Institute, a progressive think tank, told me.

Much of the rethinking was happening in Sen. Elizabeth Warren’s orbit. Warren, a Harvard law professor and consumer law expert, had come to Washington in late 2008 to help Congress oversee the bank bailouts; she soon won national fame with her tough questioning of both bankers and Obama officials like Geithner.

Warren’s pet idea for a new consumer protection agency made it into law, and Obama gave her a temporary gig setting that agency up. But when she asked Obama if he’d give her the job permanently, he declined, arguing — likely correctly — that she couldn’t be confirmed by the Senate. “I was disappointed, but not surprised,” Warren later wrote. The natural solution was to run for Senate herself; she won her Massachusetts seat in 2012.

Yet, nearly two years into her term, and after dismal 2014 midterm results for Democrats, Warren was frustrated — Obama’s team, she thought, still seemed beholden to the old ways. So she started to pick fights. She sank Obama’s nomination of Antonio Weiss, an investment banker, for a Treasury Department position, and gave a fiery speech blasting a financial regulation rollback in Congress’s year-end spending bill. Warren believed “personnel is policy,” and that Obama was simply appointing and listening to too many of the wrong people.

Warren also began to look beyond Wall Street in her desire to find what ailed the American economy. She embraced a theory, pushed by a small group of writers and advocates like Barry Lynn, Lina Khan, Matt Stoller, and David Dayen, that the problem wasn’t just finance but also Big Tech and big corporations generally.

Sen. Warren speaks at a Roosevelt Institute event on May 12, 2015. Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty

Traditional antitrust policy had been that the government should intervene when corporate concentration raised prices for consumers. But these advocates wanted to rethink and expand the concept of antitrust — to make it about challenging the concentration of corporate power, even when the companies in question (like Amazon) offered low prices to consumers. This was the start of the new antitrust movement.

Warren’s outspokenness caught Hillary Clinton’s attention. Wary of a primary challenge from the left, she arranged a sit-down with Warren, in which the Massachusetts senator made clear what she really cared about: She didn’t want Wall Street’s preferred appointees, and she had her own list of people she liked better.

Bernie Sanders’s surprisingly strong campaign amped up the populist pressure on Clinton. Yet instead of endorsing Sanders, who few believed could win, Warren remained neutral during the primaries, preserving her chance to play an inside game with Clinton afterward.

Talks between Warren’s and Clinton’s camps continued up to Election Day. The Roosevelt Institute established itself as a progressive competitor to Democrats’ favorite think tank, the Center for American Progress, and sent along Warren-friendly names: binders full of progressives.

Warren had made herself someone that Democratic leaders couldn’t ignore. “In early 2014, nobody cared at all what our side thought because there was no credible threat and no pain inflicted,” a former Warren aide told me. “By 2016, they did care — because there was a credible threat and there was pain inflicted.”

A Clinton transition official backed up this assessment, telling Politico, “It was kind of a pain in the ass to be thinking about her all the time.” Still, though she and her allies had won a seat at the table, they weren’t at the head of the table just yet.

“A semi-vast left-wing conspiracy”: How Democrats crafted a new agenda during the Trump years

Trump’s 2016 victory came as a seismic shock to Democrats. Party elites were so stunned by Clinton’s defeat that they began to question their fundamental assumptions about how politics worked. The establishment was grappling for answers; some of them looked in the mirror and wondered: Was this our fault?

A well-funded effort to convince them that it was indeed their fault soon materialized. Influential progressives who wanted to challenge the party’s consensus saw opportunity. Larry Kramer, the head of the Hewlett Foundation, launched a heavily funded effort to discredit neoliberalism as an “intellectual paradigm.” The Ford Foundation, having already reoriented its giving around inequality in 2015, joined in. The Omidyar Network (funded by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar) began its own push to “reimagine capitalism.”

So, during the Trump years, money flowed into think tanks and advocacy groups old and new, in a project inspired by conservative donors’ decades-long project of building a right-wing counterestablishment. In his book The Middle Out, journalist Mike Tomasky dubbed this an “increasingly at least semi-vast left-wing conspiracy” — a “network of people and groups” that “helped change the economic conversation in dramatic ways.”

Close ties developed among many of these thinkers and experts, many of whom had nonprofit posts but hoped to enter government or influence appointments later on. Hewlett and Omidyar grants also funded new centers at universities and projects at certain media outlets (including this one; the Omidyar Network funded two Vox reporting projects in 2019 and 2020, though they had no editorial oversight over these projects).

A key figure in this grant-making effort was Jennifer Harris, who headed the Hewlett Foundation’s grantmaking on economic issues. Harris had come to progressive economics from an unusual direction: through foreign policy. She was a national security hawk who, while working at the State Department, came to believe that the US’s longtime approach to trade deals had been disastrously captured by big corporations — that it had hollowed out important domestic industries and posed serious strategic risks in a new era of great power competition with China.

Harris concluded that flawed and outdated neoliberal thinking was failing the country on many fronts. “Paradigms like neoliberalism function at a society level,” she told me. “Their power derives precisely from how many of their premises are taken for granted, and for how much consensus they enjoy, across the ideological spectrum.” The world, she continued, was at a “dangerous” juncture, due to “the return of great power competition and the urgency of climate change.”

With Hewlett’s grant-making, Harris wanted to help shape a new intellectual paradigm to more effectively grapple with these new challenges. She funded many left critiques of neoliberalism, as well as a few from the right.

Funding the New Progressive Economics Between 2017 and 2024, the Hewlett Foundation spent tens of millions of dollars to develop alternatives to neoliberalism. Grantees included: Progressive think tanks: Hewlett funded policy work at the Roosevelt Institute ($5.8 million), Washington Center on Equitable Growth ($6.1 million), Economic Policy Institute ($1.4 million), Demos ($1.1 million), and the Center for Economic and Policy Research ($615,000). The new antitrust movement: Grants went to Open Markets ($750,000), the American Economic Liberties Project ($450,000), and the Economic Security Project’s Anti-Monopoly Fund ($1.3 million). Groups on the right: Hewlett funded the policy group American Compass ($2.9 million) and the journal American Affairs ($1.2 million), which challenged the right’s free-market thinking. Media: Hewlett funded coverage of and reporting projects about new economic thinking at the Atlantic ($1.3 million), Boston Review ($1.9 million), and the American Prospect ($665,000), though it did not have editorial oversight over such coverage. Academia: Hewlett funded new research initiatives or centers on the economy at Harvard ($7.5 million), Yale ($4 million), Johns Hopkins ($15 million), Howard ($10 million), UC Berkeley ($9.8 million), and MIT ($7.5 million).

But what, exactly, would the new agenda entail?

For one, many progressives embraced Warren and her allies’ antitrust push. So did Democratic leaders, who were seeking populist policies as their party was turning against Big Tech. After the leading new antitrust movement activists had been controversially ousted from the New America Foundation think tank, they formed new advocacy groups that won Hewlett and Omidyar funding.

Onetime blogger Matt Stoller became particularly influential on this topic. Through his book Goliath, an email newsletter, and his pugnacious Twitter presence, he hammered home the message that Big Tech and big business were at the heart of the country’s woes. Warren, who has praised Stoller as “a brilliant thinker and writer,” released a plan to break up Big Tech companies in 2019, near the start of her own presidential campaign.

But beyond aligning with the Warrenites, Jen Harris also began to help shape another pillar of Democrats’ agenda: a new industrial policy, in which the government would intervene in the economy by financially supporting key industries — with strings attached.

Good free-market neoliberals had historically disdained this idea, believing government attempts to meddle in the economy would have bad results. But industrial policy appealed to several important Democratic constituencies.

Labor wanted more US union jobs. Climate change activists wanted money for the clean energy sector. National security hawks wanted to challenge China. Political operatives thought it might play well in the Rust Belt. Much of the business community might be happy about it too — after all, it involved giving US companies money.

Democratic policy wunderkind Jake Sullivan liked what Jen Harris — and Elizabeth Warren — had to say. In line for a top policy job under Hillary Clinton, Sullivan had been one of those undergoing a dark night of the soul since 2016. He had considered a top lobbying job at Google, but instead chose to work at nonprofits rethinking the policy agenda. And by June 2018, he sounded excited about what he was seeing.

US National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan waits to speak during the daily press briefing at the White House on March 18, 2024. AFP via Getty Images

“There’s something profound happening in American politics right now,” Sullivan wrote in Democracy. He asserted the country was at a “turning point,” disillusioned by free-market excesses and open to bold new policies. “Democrats should not blush too much, or pay too much heed, when political commentators arch their eyebrows about the party moving left,” he continued. “The center of gravity itself is moving, and this is a good thing.”

“I never thought I’d live to see a time when my allies were in charge”: How progressives won on personnel under Biden

The left did not technically win the 2020 Democratic primary, as Joe Biden — the most old school of the major contenders — emerged triumphant over Sanders and Warren.

But Biden embraced the new agenda anyway. He had long been close to labor and skeptical of pointy-headed economists from elite universities. (“He’s so old,” Felicia Wong of the Roosevelt Institute later said, “that it turns out he’s actually pre-neoliberal.”) Now, amid the deepening pandemic crisis, the idea of an “FDR-size presidency” sounded appealing. Key aides around him, like Ron Klain and Bruce Reed, agreed that bold progressive thinking was needed, and Sullivan became the campaign’s top policy adviser. Wong was named to the transition team.

Other progressives wanted to hold Biden’s feet to the fire from the outside once he won. Warren’s chief of staff Dan Geldon departed her office, starting a firm pushing opposition research about potential appointees he deemed unreliable. Jeff Hauser of the Revolving Door Project frequently disparaged potential nominees as corporate hacks and sellouts.

Such attacks often showed up in the American Prospect and the Intercept, two publications solidly aligned with the new agenda. Hewlett or Omidyar money helped fund the links in this chain — the semi-vast left-wing conspiracy was at work. (Its participants argued they were fighting against far greater corporate money and influence.)

The good-cop, bad-cop approach succeeded. Champions of the new progressive economics such as Jen Harris and many Warren allies scored key White House and regulatory posts. Biden’s Cabinet secretaries were more traditional Democrats, but when they tried to staff their agencies, their picks were often overruled by the White House in favor of alternatives preferred by the Warrenites.

The new antitrust movement scored particularly big, though it took some hardball. Biden got Lina Khan confirmed by the Senate as an FTC commissioner and only afterward revealed he’d make her the commission’s chair; Republicans (and some Democrats) were shocked that the 32-year-old calling for a total rethink of antitrust policy would be in charge.

Lina Khan, chair of the Federal Trade Commission, during a House Judiciary Committee hearing on Thursday, July 13, 2023. Bloomberg via Getty Images

Reformers also wanted attorney Jonathan Kanter, a longtime critic of Google, for the top Department of Justice antitrust job. Attorney General Merrick Garland initially seemed disinclined to follow their counsel — but when word leaked out that Garland was considering other contenders, articles slamming them appeared in the Prospect and the Intercept. Kanter got the gig.

Quickly, Biden’s administration took on a different character from Obama’s. ”Economists and financiers are simply far less influential,” Ezra Klein reported. The nonprofit world and labor leaders rose in influence. So did elite progressive lawyers: the Biden administration was chock-full of Yale Law School grads, including Sullivan, Khan, and Jen Harris. (Twenty-five of Harris’s Hewlett grantees got Biden administration jobs, according to The Middle Out.)

(Some of) Biden’s progressive appointees Lina Khan: A leading intellectual of the new antitrust movement, Khan’s aggressive tenure atop the FTC has chilled corporate consolidation.

Jonathan Kanter: A law partner who’d spent years suing Google in private practice, Kanter is now suing Google atop the Justice Department’s antitrust division.

Rohit Chopra: He helped Elizabeth Warren set up the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) back when it was established — now he heads the bureau.

Jennifer Harris: After steering millions in Hewlett Foundation grants to critique neoliberalism, Harris had a White House post on international economic issues from 2021 to 2023.

Bharat Ramamurti and Jon Donenberg: Former Warren aide Ramamurti was deputy director of Biden’s National Economic Council; after he stepped down in 2023, Warren’s chief of staff, Donenberg, succeeded him.

Gautam Raghavan: The former chief of staff to Rep. Pramila Jayapal heads the White House Presidential Personnel Office, giving progressives great influence over staff hiring.

K. Sabeel Rahman: A law professor who was president of the think tank Demos, Rahman headed the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA), a powerful post with oversight over regulations, from 2021 to 2023.

Progressives’ appointment success took on particular importance because Biden took a hands-off approach to economic policy. It was “very, very rare,” a former administration official told me, for a decision memo outlining different courses of action supported by different economic aides to be sent to the president. Biden would offer his feedback on policy plans during briefings, but staff would typically send “joint recommendation memos” that he’d then sign. In practice, that gave staff great freedom to shape policy, so long as they could agree with each other.

When the Hewlett Foundation hosted a conference on the future of neoliberalism, several Biden administration officials attended. So did the American Prospect’s Bob Kuttner, a longtime, often-lonely critic of the economic policy establishment. Afterward, Kuttner marveled: “I never thought I’d live to see a time when my allies were in charge of the government.”

The successes and struggles of Bidenomics

With Democrats in control of Congress for the first time in a decade, the party wanted to make the most of their governing majority — and that meant going big.

They started off with a $1.9 trillion stimulus bill for pandemic recovery. Economists like Larry Summers complained that this was far too big — that its size seemed to go far beyond what economic analysis suggested was necessary, and that it could worsen inflation. Democrats in Congress and the administration dismissed these warnings, not wanting to repeat Obama’s mistake of spending too little.

The rest of the Democrats’ big bold legislative agenda ran into the constraints of a 50-50 Senate. Republicans helped pass a $1 trillion infrastructure bill, but for other progressive priorities, Democrats had to tailor their plans to the restrictions of the budget reconciliation process (which bypasses the filibuster). Sen. Joe Manchin (D-WV) then nixed the sweeping social spending in the Build Back Better plan. But in the summer of 2022, Manchin did approve massive new clean energy tax credits in the Inflation Reduction Act.

Republicans also signed onto the CHIPS Act, a bill to award billions in grants to bolster a US semiconductor manufacturing industry. The bill was meant to address national security risks about the current Taiwan-centered supply chain, which was vulnerable to a future conflict with China. This was part of a broader Biden administration hardline toward Beijing that included tariffs and dramatic limits on semiconductor exports.

The IRA and CHIPS Act meant the industrial policy agenda championed by Jen Harris had made it into law, and she helped steer its implementation in the administration. Meanwhile, Khan and Kanter swung into action on antitrust, suing Amazon, Meta, Apple, and Google, among other companies. Both became key to what the administration dubbed “Bidenomics” (and the New York Times would later dub Harris “The queen bee of Bidenomics”).

But now that the new agenda was actually being implemented, its critics began to speak up — while its inherent tensions became more evident.

President Joe Biden speaks at Tioga Marine Terminal on October 13, 2023 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Mark Makela/Getty

Khan’s FTC tenure was cheered by progressives but controversial among agency staff and deeply loathed by business. She was criticized for bringing cases that seemed doomed in court — winning such cases would depend on persuading judges of new legal thinking, a project of years or decades. Khan and Kanter’s main impact was deterrence: fear of expensive investigations helped chill mergers and acquisitions. Democratic policy now appeared to be that big business shouldn’t get bigger.

Meanwhile, the new industrial policy was sending billions in tax credits and grants to big US companies, which was a bit incongruous. Indeed, Warren and her allies increasingly looked askance at the CHIPS Act grants being made by Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, who they viewed as far too eager to send money out the door with insufficient oversight.

Progressives wanted to attach stringent labor, environmental, and social justice standards to such payouts. Others argued that demanding too much — the tendency Ezra Klein dubbed “everything-bagel liberalism” — could hamper the new industries from being built. (So far, spending on factory construction has doubled, but we are still years away from seeing whether these businesses will succeed.)

The nitty-gritty of implementation also made clear that no one approach could make every constituency happy. Climate hawks complained about the administration’s tariffs on Chinese clean energy companies. Auto workers making gasoline-powered cars objected to a push toward electric vehicles. National security doves worried Biden’s China policy was too provocative. Unions’ interest in creating high-paying US jobs naturally clashed with corporate incentives to lower manufacturing costs. And did the administration really want to bolster US companies to help them compete globally — or did it want to take those companies down a peg?

Yet in the public mind, the new economic agenda was largely overshadowed by a problem the reformers had not anticipated: the highest inflation in four decades. It was the neoliberals who had warned about this, while the progressives were caught flat-footed, as was the Biden administration.

“People don’t like inflation and we got a lot of it,” economist Adam Ozimek told me. This was a global phenomenon and not primarily caused by Biden’s policies, but the administration was slow to adjust and made it somewhat worse. “The stimulus was way too large, it came out all at once, and they proceeded to follow it with a variety of spending packages,” Ozimek said. He added that the economy is now in a good place after hefty interest rate hikes, but that we took a “chaotic path” getting there.

In the end, Biden’s economic policy ended up historically unpopular. That’s left a chasm between progressives who tout Biden’s presidency as one of the most productive and consequential in recent history, and a public deeply unsatisfied with his record. Perhaps the anti-Biden sentiment was more about his age, foreign crises, and inflation that mostly wasn’t his fault — but it’s hard to blame it on neoliberalism.

“It’s hard to know what is real”: Reading the tea leaves about how Harris would govern

Shortly after Harris replaced Biden at the top of the ticket, a factional contest for influence kicked off when billionaire Reid Hoffman — who had donated millions to elect Harris — publicly declared that she should replace Khan at the FTC. Progressives responded with outrage, rallying to Khan’s defense and demanding Harris pledge to keep her in place. Harris has not yet taken a position on Khan’s future.

Reid Hoffman, co-founder of LinkedIn, during an interview on “The Circuit with Emily Chang” in San Francisco, California, on Feb. 27, 2023. Bloomberg via Getty Images

Many believe Harris will be friendlier to business, and especially to Silicon Valley, than Biden was. These fears tend to center around Harris’s brother-in-law, Tony West, who is Uber’s chief legal officer and has become an important Harris campaign adviser. West has been cultivating Wall Street and Silicon Valley support for the campaign, sending the message that Harris would be an ally to the business community.

More broadly, some center-left commentators argue the time has come for a rethink of Democrats’ rethink. Jonathan Chait proposed that Harris should revert to something more like the policy and politics of the Obama years (since Obama was a more popular and electorally successful president than Biden), while Matt Yglesias argued that the backlash against neoliberalism has “mostly served in practice as a way to tell people that it’s okay to do sloppy economic analysis.”

Warren’s allies, meanwhile, were somewhat wrongfooted by Harris’s ascent, as they had not built much of a relationship with her. An incident last year where Warren sounded unsure on whether Harris should stay on the ticket as Biden’s running mate reportedly led to some tension between their respective camps.

Still, some early signs suggested Harris might continue the Biden-Warren approach. In August, her campaign announced that their economic advisory team would include Biden’s former National Economic Council director Brian Deese, and Bharat Ramamurti, a one-time Warren aide who had been Deese’s deputy.

The reformers were initially encouraged when, in mid-August, Harris proposed a “federal ban on corporate price gouging” to combat high grocery costs. “I was really surprised and pleased that she pointed at big food corporations as a causal factor in higher food prices,” Matt Stoller told me shortly afterward. But centrist pundits criticized the idea, Republicans accused Harris of proposing socialistic price controls, and the campaign soon put out word that the policy would have limited impact.

Later that month, Harris’s advisers said she supported a proposal to tax unrealized capital gains (stock that had appreciated but not yet been sold) for people worth more than $100 million. It was a way to raise revenue and hit the wealthy; in a CNBC appearance, Ramamurti defended the idea from skeptical anchors. But investors were furious. Soon afterward, billionaire investor Mark Cuban, a prominent Harris supporter in close contact with the campaign, insisted that she wouldn’t actually go through with the idea, because it would “kill the stock market.”

As the campaign has gone on, Harris’s economic line has appeared to some to grow more cautious. Her policy plan promises a lot of new and expanded tax credits, and would raise taxes on corporations and the very wealthy, but says relatively little about expanding the welfare state. She offered an olive branch to cryptocurrency companies — in contrast to top Biden appointees and Warren, who wanted to crack down on the industry. Harris has talked about cracking down on corporate “bad actors,” but emphasized that those are the exception.

When I followed up with Stoller in late September after Harris’s Pittsburgh speech, his mood was one of deep pessimism. “I think she’s gonna do what rich people — billionaires — want,” he told me.

The campaign’s economic proposals, Stoller said, were “a mishmash of nonsense.” The progressives who had joined the campaign’s economic team, he now believed, didn’t “have any real influence” and were only included to throw a bone to critics on the left. “I think this is the Tony West show,” he said. “And if she wants to make it clear that it’s not, she needs to say so.”

If Harris won and returned to neoliberal thinking, Stoller argued, the consequences would be “a failed presidency,” “intraparty war” and perhaps even “losing a war with China.” (After we spoke, Stoller called me back to say he was speaking for himself and not his employer, and that his views on Harris’s campaign changed day-to-day.)

Others were more optimistic, or at least agnostic. Jeff Hauser of the Revolving Door Project told me while he was “concerned” about Harris’s rhetoric and apparent friendliness to the cryptocurrency industry, he was cautiously optimistic that Harris would keep Khan and Kanter in place. “There isn’t really a meaningful policy apparatus and the transition is extremely barebones and noncommittal,” Hauser said. “So it’s hard to know what is real versus what will turn out to be smoke signals that are entirely irrelevant.”

The antitrust agenda, reformers worry, could be dropped or seriously weakened. But for industrial policy, the question is less whether it will continue than what it will look like. Reformers fear it will become a corporate subsidy program in which the priorities of labor and other progressive interests take a backseat — that is, that it could start looking a lot more neoliberal.

Meanwhile, the world has changed from the Trump years. On a range of issues, the leftward movement of Democratic politicians and voters appears to have abated. Personnel changes and strategy shifts have occurred at the foundations and think tanks that pushed the new progressive economics. New topics, like AI, have risen to the top of the agenda, and need to be hashed out. For instance: should the US boost domestic AI development as part of security competition with China, or is any big AI company so dangerous that it should be regulated within an inch of its life?

The post-neoliberals’ level of influence in these debates will hinge on whether they’ve become an inextricable part of the Democratic coalition — or whether their rise under Biden was born of unusual circumstances that no longer exist. A critic of the reformers mused to me that their rise to power may have been largely due to “a lack of supervision” in the Biden White House: “And maybe once the president returns, the whole thing starts to implode.”
CNN —

As Donald Trump and Kamala Harris feverishly chase undecided voters in the final stretch of the presidential campaign, millions of people in battleground states are being served ads on Facebook and Instagram from an obscure page calling itself “The Daily Scroll.”

The social media ads, which are adorned with a nondescript logo resembling a pair of checkmarks, have promoted news articles from mainstream outlets including CNN, ABC and NBC, showing easing US inflation, cheaper insulin prices, and the consequences of state abortion bans.

But the ads on Meta-owned platforms aren’t being paid for by any news outlet — they’re a product of Harris’ presidential campaign, which has spent heavily on social media platforms and embraced influencers to power her online efforts against Trump.

Since Harris launched her bid for president this summer, her campaign has spent more than $11 million on Facebook and Instagram ads to promote The Daily Scroll into users’ feeds, a CNN analysis found. That made it the second biggest page by spending on political or social issues ads in the last 90 days, after only Harris’ main campaign page.

A screenshot of The Daily Scroll, a Facebook page managed by the Harris for President campaign. From Facebook

The Harris campaign spent another $900,000 on ads from a similar news aggregator page dubbed “Headlines 2024.”

The ads promoting The Daily Scroll have appeared on screens at least 700 million times, according to data from Meta’s Ad Library, with about 97% of views coming from seven battleground states: Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Nevada, Arizona, Georgia, and North Carolina.

All the ads include a disclaimer that they are “paid for by Harris for President,” and they do not appear to violate Meta’s rules for political advertisers.

The Daily Scroll and Headlines 2024 pages are just a small part of a much wider effort to reach undecided voters across all forms of media, Kevin Munoz, a Harris campaign spokesperson, told CNN. Promoting news stories is just one of many digital strategies the campaign is using, in addition to traditional online display ads and short video clips to target voters on YouTube and other platforms, he said.

A screenshot shows a ProPublica story shared on The Daily Scroll's Instagram story feature. From Instagram

Overall, the Harris campaign has far outspent the Trump campaign on Meta’s platforms, spending nearly $80 million on ads since this summer, compared with about $9.4 million from Trump’s campaign and associated fundraising committees.

Unlike the Harris campaign’s main Facebook and Instagram accounts, the ads run by The Daily Scroll and Headlines 2024 aren’t soliciting donations, and most of them aren’t directing users to the campaign’s website. Instead, the Harris team is using the ads to promote select news stories from major media outlets that reflect well on the Democratic presidential nominee and poorly on Trump.

In recent months, the campaign has spent more than $2 million on The Daily Scroll to promote an ABC News story about slowing inflation — a major voter concern ahead of the election — which was viewed about 120 million times by Facebook and Instagram users in battleground states, according to the Meta database.

A Harris campaign advertisement on Facebook promoting an ABC News report on cooling inflation. From Facebook

“Good news for consumers – price increases have cooled significantly as inflation reaches the lowest point in over three years,” the ads declared.

Other news reports promoted by the page include an NBC News article on Trump boasting that his crowd sizes rivaled that of Martin Luther King Jr., a CNN video of Harris speaking the day after Joe Biden dropped out of the presidential race, and a story from The Guardian reporting that the Project 2025 conservative policy blueprint will “gut labor rights.” The campaign spent more than $300,000 on ads promoting each of those reports.

While the thousands of ads in the social media campaign have appeared in users’ feeds hundreds of millions of times, The Daily Scroll account itself appears dormant, with only a handful of public posts and roughly 1,000 followers. Headlines 2024 is even more sparse, with only about 100 followers and no posts at all. This is because Meta allows advertisers to run ads that don’t appear on the main feeds of the pages they are associated with.

“The ads are clearly labeled as being paid for by the Harris campaign; there is nothing obviously deceptive about them,” said Peter Loge, director of the School of Media and Public Affairs at George Washington University, who previously worked in the Obama administration. “There is no generic-sounding PAC associated with them.”
Rural Americans — we want to hear why you might support Kamala Harris over Donald Trump (or vice versa!). Let us know in the comments below, or fill out this Google form to remain anonymous.

If you are reading this and you're not a rural voter, don't worry! New groups of voters will be requested weekly! Also, if you don't qualify for this round but know someone who does, please send it their way!
Young women don’t trust Donald Trump, so his campaign has doubled down — or maybe tripled down — on reaching out to young, mostly white men.

In recent weeks, Trump has met with right-wing creators such as Jake Paul and Andrew Schulz who have a lot of young male fans. He’s also latched onto issues that he thinks young men like, such as supporting cryptocurrency and vaping.

This is a microcosm of his strategy more broadly: to redouble his efforts on his base, of whom men comprise the majority.

Trump is either incapable or unwilling to expand his coalition.

Trump is either incapable or unwilling to expand his coalition, likely because his politics (and character) are simply too off-putting.

But it’s a precarious strategy considering the groups he’s targeting are already low-propensity voters — made even more precarious by the fact that he’s not exactly giving them a clear reason to turn out.

Trump issues a lot of unhinged warnings about a post-apocalyptic future if Vice President Kamala Harris wins the election and offers somewhat confused support for niche (and scammy) issues like crypto.

But when you compare that with the very real motivator of abortion rights for young women, I’d venture to guess that Trump’s strategy has a low likelihood of success.

Sign up for MSNBC’s new How to Win 2024 newsletter and get election insights like this delivered to your inbox weekly.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
As 2024 got underway and political insiders started drawing up lists of competitive Senate races, few gave Texas a second look. Republican Sen. Ted Cruz was seen as a shoo-in for another term, despite his poor record and unpopularity.

But as Election Day nears, the Lone Star State’s contest has become a lot more interesting.

Public polling generally shows the GOP incumbent with small but steady leads over Rep. Colin Allred, a well-liked Texas Democrat and former NFL star. But private polling is causing fresh anxieties for Cruz and his party: Politico reported this week that the latest round of polling from the Senate Leadership Fund, the Senate Republicans’ top super PAC, found Cruz’s advantage over Allred “slipping ... from 3 points in mid-September to 1 point in October.”

This comes on the heels of Chris LaCivita, a senior campaign adviser for Donald Trump, recently writing via social media, “What the hell is wrong with the Senate race in Texas?” A new Wall Street Journal report on the contest asked in a headline, “Is Ted Cruz Blowing His Re-Election Race?”

It’s against this backdrop that the controversial senator has begun whining a bit about intraparty support. The Hill reported:

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz (R) vented his frustration with the Senate Leadership Fund, a super PAC aligned with Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.), for not spending any money in his competitive reelection race, accusing McConnell of using the group to “punish” his critics in the Senate GOP conference.

“Mitch McConnell runs the largest Republican super PAC in the country and has $400 million, but that super PAC is used to reward the Republican senators who obey him and to punish those who dare to stand up to him,” Cruz told conservative talk show host Mark Levin.

The Texan went on to complain that “not a penny“ from the Senate Republican super PAC’s coffers has been spent on his race, before pleading with Levin’s audience to send him some money.

Hours later, in a move that probably wasn’t a coincidence, Donald Trump used his social media platform to publish a couple of fresh Cruz endorsements.

I won’t pretend to have any special insights into the race, but as a rule, confident candidates on pace to prevail don’t look and sound like Cruz looks and sounds right now.
Maria Bartiromo of Fox News asked former President Donald Trump on Sunday whether he thought the November election would be peaceful. Bartiromo was specifically referring to “outside agitators,” such as terrorists on the watch list or migrants who Trump keeps falsely insisting are driving up the country’s crime rates.

Trump chose to express a fascistic desire to use the military against his dissenters, or as he termed them, the “radical left lunatics.”

Trump could have said he hoped the election would be peaceful. He could have used that moment in the interview on Fox News’ “Sunday Morning Futures” to call for peace no matter the outcome. He could have even said he has no idea what far-left protesters might do if he wins or what his MAGA base would do if he loses. Instead, Trump chose to express a fascistic desire to use the military against his dissenters, or as he termed them, the “radical left lunatics.”

He said: “I think the bigger problem is the enemy from within. We have some very bad people. We have some sick people, radical left lunatics.”

Then he added, “It should be very easily handled by, if necessary, by National Guard, or if really necessary by the military, because they can’t let that happen.” Not only did Trump say this so-called enemy within “is more dangerous than China, Russia and all these countries,” but he also said some of his political adversaries are enemies of our country, including Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., who led the prosecution in Trump’s first impeachment trial and is running for the U.S. Senate.

While Trump won’t be in power on Nov. 5, his authoritarian fantasy of the military handling political dissent and his political adversaries is still a revelation of what could be in store for our country if he ever again becomes commander in chief.

Trump reportedly evaded military service in Vietnam when a podiatrist (who may never have even examined him but reportedly wanted to curry favor with Trump’s father) claimed he had bone spurs. Despite that, when he was president, Trump acted as if our military, in which he didn’t serve, existed to serve him. When protesters filled Lafayette Square across from the White House, Trump allegedly told Joint Chiefs Chairman Mark Milley to “just shoot them.” He then had Milley stride across the square with him as the protesters were tear-gassed. Milley later apologized for accompanying Trump, while he was in full uniform, for what was a political photo-op.

The New York Times reported in August that it had obtained an internal email from the Center for Renewing America that reveals discussions about using troops to “stop riots” by protesters in a second Trump term. (That center is run by Russell Vought, who was Trump’s White House budget chief. Vought helped draft the Republican Party’s 2024 platform and was tapped by the Heritage Foundation to write the chapter on the Executive Office of the President in “Project 2025.”)

When he was president, Trump acted as if our military, in which he didn’t serve, existed to serve him.

Trump has been accused of trying to manipulate the military for his own purpose before. When he was visiting Japan as president, the Navy reported: “A request was made to the U.S. Navy to minimize the visibility of USS John S. McCain,” an Arleigh Burke-class guided-missile destroyer named for Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the late war hero, and his father and grandfather. That request reportedly came from the White House. Trump, who repeatedly disparaged Sen. McCain and his service, said he didn’t make that request but called whoever did “well-meaning.”

But Trump’s suggesting that the military be used to attack the “enemy within” is far more serious.

While it’s no surprise anymore that Trump disdains the rule of law, using the military in a domestic law enforcement capacity violates America’s Posse Comitatus Act. And Trump’s love affair with the idea of deploying soldiers on a whim isn’t limited to quelling his dissenters. Trump wants to be surrounded by the most elite components of the military when it comes to his own personal security. He recently requested military support, including special forces members, as part of his protection detail.

Former Trump national security adviser and convicted felon Michael Flynn was recently asked whether he’d “sit at the head of a military tribunal to not only drain the swamp but imprison the swamp, and on a few occasions, execute the swamp.”

He replied, “There’s a way to get after this, but we have to win first.”

“These people are already up to no good, so we gotta win first. We win, and then [Katy] bar the door. Believe me, the gates of hell — my hell — will be unleashed.” If you’re hoping Flynn’s star has faded with Trump, think again. Trump says he would bring the disgraced general back in his next administration. Now, with a Supreme Court decision that finds a president has absolute immunity for acts within their core constitutional authorities and presumptive immunity for conduct on the perimeter of official conduct, Trump and his sycophants would have no guardrails between their authoritarian dreams and a nightmare of fascism.

Trump and his sycophants would have no guardrails between their authoritarian dreams and a nightmare of fascism.

If you think I’m being too dramatic or alarmist, I implore you to study how a society slowly slips into fascism. The three recognized pillars of fascism are demonization of domestic enemies, preposterous lies and contempt for domestic institutions — especially elections and the rule of law. Importantly, those pillars, all present in the Trump’s MAGA movement, have historically been bound by an affinity for military values, as reflected in Trump’s vision for our troops.

If you’re on the fence about whether Trump and his followers are headed down the dark path of fascism, don’t take it from me. Ask Gen. Milley, who, according to journalist Bob Woodward’s new book, said Trump is “fascist to the core.” Trump’s core is fully exposed, and it’s rotting in plain sight.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Other news outlets have retreated behind paywalls. At HuffPost, we believe journalism should be free for everyone.

Would you help us provide essential information to our readers during this critical time? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Native voters could swing Arizona. Both parties want their votes

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

PHOENIX — Both parties are ramping up their efforts to court Native American voters in the final stretch to Election Day.

This demographic could swing the election results in several closely divided states like Arizona.

Native Health, an urban Indian health center, has held several voter registration events across the Grand Canyon state in the run-up to the election.

“I always think that the Native vote in Arizona shouldn't be discounted,” said Walter Murillo, CEO of Native Health. “In such a tight race, I think any marginal or incremental influence that a candidate or issue might have really, really depends on convincing American-Indian voters.”

President Biden only won Arizona in 2020 by about 10,000 votes — less than a 1% margin — in a state where Native Americans make up 5% of the population.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

Native Americans have traditionally voted for Democrats, and the Harris campaign is seeking to ensure that pattern continues in 2024.

Sponsor Message

The Harris campaign on Oct. 2 launched the Native Americans for Harris-Walz coalition, aiming to mobilize tribal leaders, organizations and voters. The campaign dubbed its operations in Arizona, home to 22 federally recognized tribes, the “most expansive tribal organizing program ever in the state,” a campaign official told NPR on Oct. 12, speaking on background to discuss sensitive campaign strategy.

The campaign has already hired over 20 staff members, with plans for more, to focus on the state’s tribal areas. This is the largest Native voter outreach team for a Democratic presidential campaign in the state. Staff dedicated to Native American communities have also been hired in Wisconsin.

The Democratic National Committee on Monday announced a six-figure ad campaign targeting Native voters — dubbed the “I will Vote” campaign — in Arizona, North Carolina, Montana and Alaska, with digital, print, and radio ads with a majority being placed in local and national Native-owned publications. This is their third, and most expensive, Native-focused ad campaign.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

Vice President Harris on Oct. 8 received an endorsement from the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe in Nevada, the first-ever endorsement from the tribe in a presidential election, with the tribe citing record funding to tribes and Native American federal appointments.

Tribal leaders and young people in Nevada and Arizona spoke with Harris and her running mate Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz last week as they rallied in western swing states.

Sponsor Message

“It means so much to be back with the Gila River Indian Community,” Harris said, noting that last summer she was the first vice president to visit that tribe, mainly based outside Phoenix. “I strongly believe that the relationship between tribal nations in the United States is sacred — and that we must honor tribal sovereignty, embrace our trust in treaty obligations and ensure tribal self-determination.”

Voters already making their choices

At a powwow in Phoenix, tribal members gathered for an evening of dancing, fry bread and sales.

Kevin Jackson, a member of White Mountain Apache, has “Democracy is Indigenous” flags above his jewelry stand. He has already cast his ballot for Harris.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

“I think we need someone in there who's going to help out and help us build our infrastructure because right now it's awful,” Jackson said, noting he hopes to attend the inauguration if she is elected.

Across the park, Charles Quimayousie is making his way through the vendors. A member of the Tohono O’odham tribe, he also hopes Harris wins.

“That wall just feels too prejudiced to me,” Quimayousie said, referring to Trump’s border wall — one of the former president’s signature campaign promises to stem migration into the U.S.

“It's a good thing, but it just turns me away because when they built that, it went right through my reservation, and some of my people are still on that side, so I'm against that all the way,” he said.

Both said their tribes generally would agree with them — though there are members who will support Trump.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

Gerel Nells, who lives in Mesa and is Navajo said that between Harris and Trump he prefers Trump.

“I did like the fact that Trump put aside a plan for the missing and murdered Indigenous women of this nation,” he said. However, he has already turned in his ballot for comedian Dave Chappelle.

GOP hopes to stave off Democratic efforts

To the east of Phoenix, across the border in Gallup, New Mexico, members of the Navajo Nation pulled in to set up their booths and shop at the Gallup Flea Market, on a sunny Saturday morning.

Navajo Nation, also known as the Dine, is the largest federally recognized tribe both in terms of enrolled members and geographical land. Its territory spans the state borders of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah. Organizers are looking beyond state lines for mobilizing Arizona voters.

Sponsor Message

“I do feel like the Natives kind of brought it over last time to the Democrat side,” said Ina Noggle, who was tending to the Arizona GOP’s table at the market. She's campaigning for Trump in Arizona.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

“We're just out there trying to present the different platforms and what they have been familiar with and explaining to them that the Democrat Party is no longer the party of their grandparents and their parents,” she said. Noggle talks to voters about issues like abortion and energy independence.

Noggle, Halee Dobbins — the RNC’s communications director — and others at the event said they were not asking market-goers to vote for a specific candidate — but rather approached the conversation by talking about values.

“It makes the conversation more fruitful and more productive, honestly,” Dobbins said. “If you talk to the Navajos based on their values, that's where you really get people to feel comfortable talking about who are they going to vote for. You don't want to start with ‘Are you just going to vote for this candidate?’”

She said the Trump campaign has been meeting with Navajo Nation members at markets, rodeos, parades, and other local events, and Arizona GOP ran an ad on tribal radio to urge voters to “vote Republican.” The campaign didn’t share statistics about how much they’re spending on Native voters overall.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

As a part of their showing at the flea market, the McKinley County GOP drove about a dozen cars waving GOP flags for Trump, and New Mexican Republican candidates by honking their horns. Some people waved and honked back. Others grumbled at them to get out.



Making inroads

Still, GOP organizers said they have noticed a change.

“Four years ago it was like, we’d get like so many fingers,” said Pablo Martinez, who is the McKinley County GOP chair and joined Arizona organizers at the market. “But it's different now. Like people are coming out of their shells and there’s a little more pride.”

Sponsor Message

At the stand, market-goers picked up signs and stickers in support of Trump and Senate GOP candidate Kari Lake. Tribal members walking by assured their support.

Democrats had their own presence in the market.

Brenda Hoskie, a member of the Navajo Nation and chair of the McKinley County Democratic Party in New Mexico, said she had organized precincts and others to put up mutton stew stands on Election Day and for early voting, which began last week.

“After people vote, they can eat and give out signs,” she said.

toggle caption Ash Ponders for NPR

Since the Navajo Nation stretches across both states, she hopes her efforts will shore up Democratic support among the Navajo in Arizona, as well the San Juan Southern Paiute tribes.

“We need to win Arizona. So I'm out there making sure that we are not sitting back,” Hoskie said.
The Electoral College is far and away the single most ridiculous institution in the democratic world. It was a last-minute compromise produced by exhausted delegates at the Constitutional Convention, and though political forces that benefit from it continue to retroactively justify it, it has nevertheless been deeply unpopular for decades. Twice this century, the Electoral College has awarded control of the presidency to the candidate who received fewer votes than his opponent, with predictably disastrous policy consequences that we will still be feeling decades from now.

And the Electoral College is the reason that the entire 2024 election is going to come down to roughly seven states in a country with 50 of them, plus Washington, D.C. Collectively these states hold less than 20 percent of the American population, yet for the past 18 months they have gotten to dominate the national conversation in ways the rest of us could only dream about. There are more Republicans in the Democratic stronghold of California than there are in Michigan, Georgia, and Nevada put together, but no one cares what they say or think because they have had the misfortune of being more or less permanently outnumbered by Democrats in statewide elections for a generation.

Political science research has found that presidents direct more resources and attention to states whose approval they will need in the next election. In a 2015 study of federal spending from 1984 to 2008, political scientists Douglas Kriner and Andrew Reeves found that “in election years, swing state counties that are supportive of the president see billions of dollars more in federal spending just by virtue of the state in which they are located.” That means not even everyone in the swing state benefits—just the counties that are most supportive of the president’s political party. In addition to federal grants, these dynamics appear to apply to the awarding of federal contracts, which were awarded in much higher numbers to firms located in landslide states and swing states, according to this 2023 analysis by a group of Hong Kong–based researchers.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

That goes for catastrophes, too, something that should be on everyone’s mind this week as Hurricane Milton batters the west coast of Florida. Kriner and Reeves, in a related article, analyzed disaster declarations during the same time period and found that counties in states that support the president’s party as well as swing-state counties “were more likely to receive disaster declarations than counties in other states,” a conclusion shared by other researchers.

Related From Slate Democrats Desperately Need to Change Course on This Losing Strategy Read More

This should be no surprise after what we endured during the Trump era. Just this week, two former high-level Trump advisers revealed that in 2018, Trump ordered staffers to look up how many votes he received in areas of California impacted by wildfires before approving disaster aid. This is Electoral College brain-poisoning in action. Perhaps more infamously, he jawed with the mayor of San Juan instead of directing the government to address the grave crisis inflicted on Puerto Rico by Hurricane Maria in 2017, a storm that ultimately killed thousands of American citizens on the island. He later called for a halt to federal relief spending there.

Advertisement

And while it appears the Biden administration is treating the impact of this season’s hurricanes as it should, the media’s focus on the almost unfathomable catastrophe in the western mountains of swing state North Carolina is a stark contrast to the near-total absence of attention to what’s going on just over the state line in deep-red Tennessee—complete with the obligatory analyses of how the hurricane’s aftermath might impact the outcome in the Tar Heel State. As for the electoral impact of Helene in Tennessee, no one is asking and no one cares. That kind of coverage disparity is an almost inevitable consequence of swing-state mania, and we shouldn’t be surprised when it seeps into policy decisions.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

As with nearly everything else about our politics, this bizarre distortion of our political life by the Electoral College has gotten dramatically worse over the course of this century, as Americans have been sorted into “red” and “blue” states by virtue of the decisions made by broadcasters on the evening of the 2000 election. That was the night the networks chose red for states that Republican George W. Bush won and blue for states that Democrat Al Gore won, an arbitrary data visualization scheme that now serves as an inescapable template for our politics and identities.

It hasn’t always been like this. Throughout much of the 20th century, voters were much more willing to switch votes from one presidential election to the next. In 1968, for example, a staggering 30 states switched from Democratic in 1964 to Republican. In 1976, 22 states flipped Democratic after Republican Richard Nixon’s nationwide landslide in 1972. In the second half of the 20th century, it was routine for more than 20 percent of the electorate to switch their votes between presidential cycles, according to the Center For Politics. In 2020, just five states flipped from 2016, with fewer than 6 percent of the voters nationally changing their party support between elections. In 2016, it was six states.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Since 1992, 18 states plus D.C., now totaling 193 electoral votes, have voted for the Democratic candidate in every single presidential election. For Republicans, it is 12 states that equal 103 electoral votes. In other words, more than half of the electoral votes available have gone to the same party for eight consecutive presidential cycles.

This dramatic shrinking of the battleground map has allowed campaigns to focus ever greater firepower on a tiny handful of states, which get flooded with the overwhelming majority of all ads, staff, and campaign visits. The national parties have, in effect, abandoned the rest, at least in terms of presidential politics.

Advertisement

Another way of looking at it is this: In the 2000 election, 13 states were decided by fewer than five points, making all of them plausible targets for both candidates in 2004. In 2020, it was just eight, and the GOP’s midterm landslide in Florida has all but removed it from lists of purple states. Tuesday’s New York Times/Siena College poll showing Trump with a 13-point lead in the state is probably the end of Democrats’ dreams of a resurgence there—so we’re down to just seven battleground states.

Advertisement

One of the many hollow arguments that proponents of the Electoral College use to justify this absurd situation is that the swing states change over time and basically everyone gets their shot eventually. Yet 5 of the 10 closest states by margin in 2012 are on the list of 2024 battleground states. In fact, with the exception of Florida, the 2024 battleground map is virtually the same as it was in 2020. That means that the four largest states by population in the country—California, Texas, Florida, and New York, with around 109 million people between them—are effectively uncontested this year. If Texas keeps trending blue, that could change soon, but right now the Electoral College is locking more people than ever out of having any meaningful input into what happens this year.

Advertisement

It’s just completely exhausting! If I have to hear about one more focus group with undecided voters in Pennsylvania or read another campaign journalist’s tired Pennsylvania diner story, I am going to hurl myself into Lake Michigan. If I hear the presidential candidates use their precious time in national debates to pledge their undying fealty to a policy—hydraulic fracking—that is important to a fraction of the voters of one swing state, I am going to try to talk several hundred thousand of my closest associates in Illinois into voting Republican for one cycle so that we get some consideration the next time around. And to my friends in the battlegrounds who are sick and tired of the nonstop politicking and attention, all I can say is: We’re as sick of you as you are of us.
In Dante’s “Inferno,” as I’ve previously written, moral cowards aren’t even allowed into hell. They are the “sorry souls” stuck in the vestibule where they are doomed to be forgotten. “The world will let no fame of theirs endure,” Dante’s guide, Virgil, explains. “Let us not talk of them but look and pass.”

Actually, let’s talk about them.

We know their names — the anti-Trump Republicans like former Vice President Mike Pence, Sen. Mitt Romney, former Rep. Paul Ryan, former Gov. Chris Christie, former President George W. Bush, former U.N. Ambassador John Bolton, New York Times columnist Bret Stephens — who reject Trump but cannot bring themselves to vote for the one candidate who could stop him. And we also know the names of the allegedly anti-Trump conservatives who have since fallen in line behind a second Trump term — from former Gov. Nikki Haley to Gov. Chris Sununu and the editors of National Review. Polls would suggest that the vast majority of Republican and conservative voters are following their lead.

Many of these officials and pundits recognize the dangers that Trump poses, but want to preserve their “relevance” in the party.

Many of these officials and pundits recognize the dangers that Trump poses, but want to preserve their “relevance” in the party; others clearly hope for Trump’s defeat, but want to keep their hands clean by staying above the fray and casting a write-in vote.

But then there are also the lifelong conservatives who have defied partisan loyalty and endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris: former Vice President Dick Cheney and former Rep. Liz Cheney; former Rep. Adam Kinzinger; Judge Michael Luttig; former Attorney General Alberto Gonzalez; retired Gen. Stanley McChrystal; Georgia’s former Lt. Gov. Geoff Duncan; former Sens. Jeff Flake and Nancy Kassebaum; First Lt. Jimmy McCain; former Rep. Joe Walsh; Times columnist David French, Washington Post columnist George Will, and a host of former GOP aides.

Last week, I joined them, and made it clear to my fellow Wisconsinites that I intend to vote for Harris.

To be sure, the pro-Harris conservatives represent a tiny faction — you might even say a rump caucus — of the GOP. But despite the small numbers, we could still be important in what promises to be a razor-close race. A recent New York Times poll found that Harris “has begun making inroads among Republicans: 9 percent said they planned to support her, up slightly from 5 percent last month.” In Wisconsin (where the race is essentially tied), the latest Marquette Law School poll found a small, but potentially decisive group of undecided voters: “conflicted partisans are mostly Republican voters who have big personal qualms about Trump.”

So let’s not the not underestimate the significance of the GOP defections. A while back, I wrote in The Atlantic: “Before Trump, the ideological divide between Harris and conservative Republicans might have been too large to bridge. But this is not a normal campaign.”

And that is the Great Divide.

Many on the right simply cannot shift their mindset and stop seeing this election as a more-or-less traditional choice between the right and the left. Yes, they say, Trump is deplorable and unfit, but Kamala Harris is a progressive. They cite her position on taxes, on guns, on the border, on transgender rights, the environment, business regulations and spending.

None of this is normal. And the standards and issues that used to animate us no longer apply.

But the newly minted pro-Harris conservatives recognize that this election isn’t about those things at all. They recognize that a second Trump term will transcend typical ideological/political differences.

Leave aside for a moment Trump’s serial lying, fraud, grifts, alleged sexual assaults, criminal indictments and one very public attempt to overthrow an election. Set aside his abandonment of free trade and fiscal restraint. This is a man who has called for terminating “all rules, regulations, and articles, even those found in the Constitution”; who promises a presidency built around retribution; whose campaign has become a bullhorn for bigotry; who is increasingly leaning into fascist rhetoric, and who leads his rally crowds in cheering for Russian President Vladimir Putin and booing Ukrainian President Volodymir Zelenskyy. And who now threatens to use the military against political protesters and the so-called “enemy within.”

None of this is normal. And the standards and issues that used to animate us no longer apply. When she joined Harris in Ripon, Wisconsin, this month, Liz Cheney reminded the audience why she wouldn’t be sitting this election out.

“Donald Trump was willing to sacrifice our Capitol, to allow law enforcement officers to be beaten and brutalized in his name, and to violate the law and the Constitution in order to seize power for himself,” she said. “I don’t care if you are a Democrat or Republican or an independent, that is depravity and we must never become numb to it.”

Indeed, Cheney has been one of the clearest and most outspoken voices on why the dangers posed by Trump disqualify him as a presidential candidate. “We can survive bad policies. We cannot survive torching the Constitution,” she told Joy Behar on “The View” back in January.

This is the theme echoed by essentially all of the conservatives who have broken ranks: We may disagree on policy, but this is an emergency. And in every genuine crisis, people of goodwill put aside their differences. When the emergency passes, we can go back to arguing about other things; but right now, the moment demands that we make common cause, and put country over party. Even, and especially, if that means voting for Kamala Harris.
With roughly three weeks remaining before Election Day, and early voting already underway across much of the country, there’s nothing subtle about Kamala Harris’ closing message — or its intended audience. Politico reported, for example, on the Democratic vice president’s newest television ad:

Kamala Harris’ campaign is out with a new ad targeting Republican voters in the battleground state of Arizona that features the GOP mayor of Mesa saying that he is a “lifelong Republican” but he has “always put country over party.”

In the spot, Mayor John Giles, who helps lead Arizona Republicans for Harris, tells viewers, “I know Donald Trump’s second term would be all about himself. That’s why, like so many other Republicans, I cannot support Donald Trump. Kamala Harris and I may not agree on everything, but I do know that she will always put country first.”

The message was part of a larger and unsubtle push. Late last week, for example, the Democratic nominee held an event in Arizona — speaking in front of a backdrop featuring the phrase “Country Over Party” — where Harris vowed to convene a bipartisan council of policy advisers if she wins the White House.

A few days earlier, during an appearance on ABC's “The View,” Harris also said, “You asked me what is the difference between Joe Biden and me — that will be one of the differences. I’m going to have a Republican in my Cabinet.”

The week before that, the incumbent vice president held a campaign event in Wisconsin alongside former House Republican Conference Chair Liz Cheney. (There were, of course, “Country Over Party” signs behind them, too.)

There’s no great mystery here. Harris and her team, mindful of the fact that the presidential race is incredibly close and competitive, is taking deliberate steps to reach out beyond her party’s base. The goal, obviously, is to appeal to independents and disaffected Republicans, with an emphasis on bipartisanship and patriotism.

Of course, Trump is pitching a closing message of his own, and the qualitative differences tell us a great deal, not only about the candidates, but also about their electoral strategy.

As Harris tries to expand her reach and appeal, the former Republican president isn’t making any meaningful attempt to motivate anyone outside his far-right base. The Washington Post, for example, reported in the wake of his ugly campaign rally in Aurora, Colorado:

Donald Trump is leaning into a nativist, anti-immigrant message in the final stage of his third presidential campaign, advancing a closing argument centered on fearmongering, falsehoods and stereotypes about migrants as polls show his edge on economic issues fading.

The conventional wisdom has long held that national candidates make appeals to their respective bases during the presidential primaries, before ultimately targeting the center as Election Day draws closer. The GOP nominee clearly has no use for that model.

By and large, Trump appears to have come to the conclusion that the surest way back to the White House is through an anti-immigrant message. With this in mind, the former president has already raised the prospect of militarized deportations and mass detention camps. He’s also echoed Adolph Hitler’s “Mein Kampf,” complaining about those whom he believes are “poisoning the blood of our country.”

But that was the start, not the end, of a radical pitch. In recent days, the Republican candidate has done everything from accusing immigrants of spreading “highly contagious” diseases to talking up eugenics to raising the prospect of executions. He’s begun speaking with greater frequency about deporting people who entered the United States legally.

On Friday night in Nevada, Trump said immigrants were blocking Americans from enrolling children in public schools or finding a bed in local hospitals. Hours earlier, in Colorado, the Republican vowed to send “elite squads” into areas nationwide to conduct deportation raids — a promise he echoed over the weekend.

A Politico analysis of 20 recent Trump speeches found that the Republican’s rhetoric has become more overtly “racist” — and his messaging “is getting darker.”

I won’t pretend to know which of these competing approaches — Harris’ broader appeals vs. Trump’s narrow appeals — will prove effective, but those suggesting there are no real differences between the major party nominees have no idea what they’re talking about.
Donald Trump broke new ground in his criticisms of Americans last year when the former president released a video in which he argued, among other things, “[T]he greatest threat to Western Civilization today is not Russia. It’s probably, more than anything else, ourselves and some of the horrible, U.S.A.-hating people that represent us.”

Months later, in a Veterans Day message, the Republican not only referred to many Americans as “vermin” — phrasing that echoed Hitler and Mussolini — he concluded, “The threat from outside forces is far less sinister, dangerous, and grave, than the threat from within.”

In other words, the former president suggested that he’d identified the United States’ biggest problem: Americans he disliked.

Trump has met the enemy. Evidently, it’s us — or at least a whole lot of us.

The GOP candidate has been leaning into this messaging of late, declaring at a campaign rally in Pennsylvania that he considers the Democrats on Vice President Kamala Harris’ team to be “the enemy from within.” Around the same time, at an event in Wisconsin, Trump suggested that his American opponents are “more dangerous” than Russia and China.

On Friday, the Republican added a new word to his talking points, condemning “the enemy from within — all the scum that we have to deal with.”

For those with an eye toward history, Trump is the first White House hopeful to ever refer to his own fellow Americans as “scum.”

That was new, but it wasn’t the most unsettling comment on the subject. The Washington Post reported:

Former president Donald Trump said in an interview that aired Sunday that he is worried about the prospect of unspecified actions by what he dubbed “radical left lunatics” on Election Day, urging that the National Guard or U.S. military be deployed on American soil against those he labeled “the enemy from within.”

In an interview that aired on Fox News, Maria Bartiromo asked Trump whether he was “expecting chaos on Election Day.” As part of the question, she referred to immigrants with criminal records and those on terrorist watch lists.

“I think the bigger problem is the enemy from within,” Trump replied. “We have some very bad people. We have some sick people, radical left lunatics.”

In the next breath, in an apparent reference to Election Day concerns, the Republican concluded, “It should be very easily handled by, if necessary, by National Guard — or if really necessary, by the military, because they can’t let that happen.”

In context, it appeared that Trump was suggesting the military can, and perhaps should, be used against Americans on American soil.

That’s certainly how the Harris campaign perceived it.

In a written statement, a Harris campaign spokesperson said the former president “is suggesting that his fellow Americans are worse ‘enemies’ than foreign adversaries, and he is saying he would use the military against them. ... What Donald Trump is promising is dangerous, and returning him to office is simply a risk Americans cannot afford.”

The Associated Press had a related report on this, taking stock of the bigger picture: “During his first term as president, Donald Trump tested the limits of how he could use the military to achieve policy goals. If given a second term, the Republican and his allies are preparing to go much further, reimagining the military as an all-powerful tool to deploy on U.S. soil.”

Those keeping track of Trump’s authoritarian-style agenda have a dramatic new data point to keep in mind.

As for the Republicans criticisms of Americans, in September 2016, Hillary Clinton delivered remarks in which she took aim at Trump’s radicalized base. To be “grossly generalistic,” she said, “you could put half of Trump’s supporters into what I call the ‘basket of deplorables.’”

More specifically, Clinton lamented the fact that so much of Trump’s core support is “racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, [and] Islamaphobic” — an assessment that’s stood up pretty well to further scrutiny.

Nevertheless, Republicans became obsessed with the line, and the media soon followed. I’ll confess that I never fully understood why this became a furious point of contention, but the conventional wisdom was that Clinton had gone too far: Criticizing rival politicians is fine, but criticizing Americans, even bigoted Americans, was simply beyond the pale for someone seeking the nation’s highest office.

Trump, meanwhile, has gone from describing many Americans as “evil” to condemning them as “vermin” to equating them with the foreign enemies to labeling them “the enemy from within” — who might even warrant some kind of military response.

Eight years later, “basket of deplorables” seems almost quaint.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
Conservatives were rightly outraged when social media platforms including Twitter removed links to a New York Post story run weeks before the 2020 elections detailing embarrassing information contained on Hunter Biden’s laptop. Twitter executives later admitted it was a mistake, an overreaction to the platform’s handling of tweets linking to 2016 Democratic National Committee documents hacked by the Russian government.

But if the removal of the Hunter Biden content was problematic because of its potential impact on the 2020 election, how should we feel about Elon Musk, owner of X (formerly Twitter) using his platform to give unremitting support to Donald Trump’s 2024 candidacy via at times misleading and incendiary election content pushed to millions of users’ feeds daily?

How should we feel about Elon Musk, owner of X (formerly Twitter) using his platform to give unremitting support to Donald Trump’s 2024 candidacy?

A new deep dive by The New York Times last week described Musk as “the richest man in the world [who] has involved himself in the U.S. election in a manner unparalleled in modern history.” Indeed, even as Musk railed about social media’s Hunter Biden censorship, the Times alleges X worked with Trump’s campaign to stifle a potentially embarrassing Trump story: “After a reporter’s publication of hacked Trump campaign information last month, the campaign connected with X to prevent the circulation of links to the material on the platform, according to two people with knowledge of the events. X eventually blocked links to the material and suspended the reporter’s account.” (Musk did not return a request for comment on the Times’ reporting.)

Meanwhile, what to make of Musk’s recent post stating, “Very few Americans realize that, if Trump is NOT elected, this will be the last election. Far from being a threat to democracy, he is the only way to save it!” Musk went on to make a wholly unsubstantiated claim that President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris plan to turn millions of noncitizens in the U.S. into voters who will inevitably vote for Democrats.

This, on top of Musk’s commandeering of the @america handle for his super PAC, the millions of dollars he has pledged to a pro-Trump super PAC, and his personal appearances on the campaign trail for Trump. Plus his efforts to gather voter registration information for his super PAC by offering $47 for every referral that results in a petition signature. (The petition pledges support for the First and Second Amendments.)

Musk’s transformation of Twitter to X helps us think clearly about two issues that have been percolating about social media platforms: Should government regulations police speech on platforms for political bias? And what should social media companies do about election-related disinformation?

First on the question of platform neutrality: The best way to think about Musk’s actions is to recall early-20th-century journalist A.J. Liebling: “Freedom of the press is guaranteed only to those who own one.” Magazines like The Nation or television networks like Fox News have ideological leanings; and the same is true of social media platforms. Those who run the platforms can curate the content and share ideological messages. And just like you can cancel your subscription to a magazine or change the channel, you can unsubscribe from X or fail to run advertising on it, a trend that has accelerated with Musk’s highly partisan actions.

Back when Twitter and Facebook deplatformed Donald Trump after he failed to immediately and forcefully condemn the Jan. 6, 2021, violence at the U.S. Capitol, Florida and Texas each passed laws requiring big social media companies to carry content from politicians, even if it was false or incendiary.

I wrote a brief to the Supreme Court with other professors when those laws were challenged on First Amendment grounds, arguing that social media platforms have the same right to curate content as newspapers. In June, the Supreme Court agreed, saying that these parts of Florida’s and Texas’ laws were unconstitutional. I stand by this principle, even as X’s alleged liberal bias has shifted conservative under Musk, and even as Musk has regularly spread election disinformation. Government control of the content of political speech creates more dangers than it solves.

Government control of the content of political speech creates more dangers than it solves.

But when it comes to election disinformation, Musk has arguably become the biggest offender, regularly sharing election information in posts that are pushed to millions of users daily. It’s kind of an interesting natural experiment.

In 2020, Twitter employed a Trust and Safety team that actively policed election disinformation and labeled some tweets as containing false or disputed content. (That labeling may have backfired, strengthening some people’s beliefs in the false posts.) This election, X has decimated the Trust and Safety team, and all manner of election-related disinformation is flourishing.

What we don’t know is whether any of this new tranche of election misinformation will sway many voters. We will need studies to see if people are more likely to be misled now than they were before, when there was more content moderation. One optimistic possibility is that the zone has been so flooded with false and misleading information that voters have become inoculated to much of it. Those who tend to believe the false information may be people who were already predisposed to believing it. If you think Democrats regularly cheat in elections, these posts will simply confirm your beliefs. If you don’t, you will reject the posts as containing nonsense and maybe leave X for a place with more reliable information.

A deepfake of Kamala Harris is not the biggest threat to this election. Rather, it’s that voters will simply give up looking for the kind of information they need to make informed election choices consistent with their interests and preferences. Voters need more than vibes.

Perhaps our greatest fear should be the impact of Musk inflaming the passions of those who already believe false narratives. How will the public react, and what will those who certify elections try to do, if Trump and Musk fan the flames of voter denial after voters have cast their ballots in November?

Even if the worst does not come to pass, Musk is hastening truth decay, destroying what was once a valuable platform for the quick sharing of information (and sometimes interaction) with leading experts in the world. X is not what it was, and that is a shame.

Thanks to the Supreme Court’s view of the First Amendment, we already live in a world where the wealthy can use their considerable resources to have even greater influence over who is elected and what elected officials do when in office. But Musk’s dedication, platform and resources takes unequal influence to a whole new level.

If we are lucky, Musk’s expensive gamble — that he can sway public opinion through a hostile takeover of both a platform and the truth — will backfire. And if we are luckier, American democracy will be able to keep pushing its way through a swamp of false election claims with continued fair elections and peaceful transitions of power.
With less than a month until the election, every hour of every day matters for a presidential candidate. Presidential campaigns are forced to make excruciating decisions about which battleground states to put most of their time, money and energy into as they seek decisive edges over their opponents.

That’s what makes former President Donald Trump’s decision to campaign in a number of blue states in these final weeks baffling. Trump is doing events in Colorado, California, Illinois and New York — states that are virtually impossible for him to win. “President Joe Biden won those states by an average of 20 points in 2020, with his 13-point Colorado win the closest,” NBC News reports. “And Colorado is the only one of those states to have voted for a Republican presidential nominee this millennium, backing George W. Bush in 2004.”

It's possible that Trump is succumbing to his deteriorating instincts.

What is Trump thinking? As always, it’s impossible to know — or whether he even is thinking. The former president has shown signs that suggest declining mental acuity, and his rhetorical patterns are more discursive and difficult to follow. Given his tendency to surround himself with yes-men, it’s possible that Trump is succumbing to his deteriorating instincts, that his campaign strategy is becoming as elliptical as his speech — and that nobody is stepping in to tell him he’s wasting his time. Trump has boasted that he can win New York. All candidates say they’re going to win states it’s clear they won’t. But given Trump’s commitment to touring a bunch of blue states, one wonders whether he is high on his own supply.

Trump’s campaign insists there’s a method to the madness. “Choosing high-impact settings makes it so the media can’t look away and refuse to cover the issues and the solutions President Trump is offering,” a senior Trump campaign adviser told NBC News of the campaign’s blue state strategy. “We live in a nationalized media environment, and the national media’s attention on these large-scale, outside-the-norm settings increases the reach of his message across the country and penetrates in every battleground state.”

According to that theory, this very article is proof that Trump’s bizarro strategy is working. The tendency of the national press to document, comment on and question the wisdom of the strategy purportedly helps Trump garner free attention and win over voters in states he must win.

That theory is a little too clever by half. The substance of coverage matters, too. And much of it of it will likely, like this article, point out that Trump seems to be behaving foolishly to the point where he could be sabotaging his chances of winning.

A number of Republican strategists have criticized Trump’s blue state tour. Republican operative Matthew Bartlett told NBC News, “This does not seem like a campaign putting their candidate in critical vote-rich or swing-vote locations — it seems more like a candidate who wants his campaign to put on rallies for optics and vibes.”One of those vibes that Trump is trying to create is fear. He seeks to frame cities run by Democrats or in states controlled by Democrats as ground zero for the mostly made-up migrant-related crises he claims his presidency would solve. At an event in Aurora, Colorado, on Friday, Trump adviser Stephen Miller pointed at photos of suspected migrant gang members in the area. “Are these the neighbors that you want in your city?” Miller asked, eliciting boos from the crowd. Trump may be hoping that depicting Aurora as a miserable place persuades or motivates voters in swing states to vote for him, lest Vice President Kamala Harris make all of America look like Aurora. (Mind you, Trump’s stories of a “gang takeover” in the town are a combination of extremely exaggerated and false.)

But as Trump obsesses over stagecraft and the best place to use migrants as scary props to try to garner votes, he endures what we know to be an opportunity cost. Political scientists have found that battleground state campaigning is an opportunity to persuade local voters and can have a statistically significant effect on voting numbers. So as Trump attempts newfangled ways to obliquely scare or inspire voters using crowds in blue states, he’s missing out on what could be critical opportunities to win over voters in battleground states, many of which could be won by extremely tight margins.

We don’t know whether Trump’s divergence from the standard campaigning playbook will help him win any votes. What we do know is that he’s wasting key opportunities to deny Harris the most coveted votes in the race. When people point out that Trump seems to be rambling incoherently, he counters that he’s using a brilliant rhetorical strategy he calls “the weave.” He now wants us to believe that a failure to prioritize the places most important for him to win is brilliant, too.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

Vice President Kamala Harris on Monday unveiled a list of policies aimed toward Black men, her latest attempt to engage a voting bloc former President Donald Trump and his campaign have attempted to court this election season.

Harris’ opportunity agenda for Black men includes a laundry list of policy proposals, including providing a million loans to Black entrepreneurs and others to start businesses, investing in Black male mentorship and training programs, protecting cryptocurrency assets, launching a health equity initiative focusing on diseases that disproportionately impact Black men like diabetes and prostate cancer, and legalizing recreational marijuana for Black men to participate in the burgeoning industry.

Advertisement

The policies draw from stops on her nationwide economic opportunity tour, during which she listened to Black men during visits to predominantly Black cities like Atlanta, Charlotte and Detroit.

The policy rollout comes in the middle of a campaign swing focused in part on Black men. Harris met with Black farmers in North Carolina on Sunday and will participate in a radio town hall in Detroit hosted by “The Breakfast Club” host Charlamagne Tha God on Tuesday.

“Black men care about economics. A lot of African American men specifically care about the cost of inflation, health care, housing, all of those things,” said Quentin Fulks, the Harris-Walz campaign’s deputy principal manager. “When it comes down to it, another thing that’s always underlying data is: How do you create generational wealth? How do you begin to build? A number of these policies attempt to answer that.”

Durham, North Carolina, Mayor Leonardo Williams (left) takes a selfie with Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris as she arrives at Raleigh-Durham International Airport in Morrisville on Saturday. Steve Helber via Associated Press

Advertisement

Harris’ plan to provide 1 million loans to black entrepreneurs, for example, would provide resources and capital for the historically marginalized group to pursue business ventures — an avenue for wealth-building. The proposals said the loans would be funded through the Small Business Administration and local partners like banks and would be forgivable up to $20,000.

The Democratic nominee also pledges to provide more financial support for Black farmers and ranchers, set a goal to double quality apprenticeships, and work with Congress to encourage businesses to limit the use of criminal arrest histories and credit scores when vetting potential employees.

The policy proposals come on the heels of much discussion concerning Black male voters. Former President Barack Obama sparked the conversation after he pleaded with Black men to “drop excuses” and support Harris’ bid for the presidency before his speech at a Pittsburgh rally last week.

”Black men feel like [politicians] show up in the fourth quarter for them, or that there’s an underlying expectation of a vote and nobody does anything to earn it,” Fulks said. “But even beyond that, there are a lot of broken promises. This is very important to the vice president and this campaign feels that everything that you see here is achievable.”

A poll from The New York Times released over the weekend found Harris’ support among Black voters to be substantially smaller than estimates of the support the Democratic presidential candidates received in 2016 and 2020. She led Trump 78% to 15%, with only 70% of Black men saying they would vote for her and 20% backing Trump. That said, polls in 2020 and 2022 ended up understating Black support for Democratic candidates.

Advertisement

Indeed, some political experts and organizers believe the hand-wringing over the Black male vote is largely overblown. Black men have consistently turned out for the Democratic Party. A Washington Post-Ipsos poll last month found support for Harris is solid among Black men.

“Black men do not vote much differently than Black women. This is a talking point being pushed that is harmful, trying to lay blame at the feet of Black men,” former Ohio state Sen. Nina Turner (D) wrote on social media.
Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris speaks at a campaign rally at East Carolina University in Greenville, N.C., Sunday, Oct. 12, 2024. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh) via Associated Press

Harris, the Democratic presidential nominee, did not speak Trump’s name, but he is most prominent among those promoting false claims about the Biden administration’s response to Hurricanes Milton and Helene. Florida was in the path of both storms, with Helene also hitting North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, while Milton headed for the open Atlantic.

Advertisement

The vice president spoke at the Koinonia Christian Center about the “heroes” all around who are helping residents without regard to political affiliation.

“Yet, church, there are some who are not acting in the spirit of community, and I am speaking of these who have been literally not telling the truth, lying about people who are working hard to help the folks in need, spreading disinformation when the truth and facts are required,” Harris said.

“The problem with this, beyond the obvious, is it’s making it harder, then, to get people life-saving information if they’re led to believe they cannot trust,” she said. “And that’s the pain of it all, which is the idea that those who are in need have somehow been convinced that the forces are working against them in a way that they would not seek aid.”

Harris said they are trying “to gain some advantage for themselves, to play politics with other people’s heart break, and it is unconscionable,” she said. “Now is not a time to incite fear. It is not right to make people feel alone.”

Advertisement

“That is not what leaders, as we know, do in crisis,” she said.

Trump made a series of false claims after Helene struck in late September, including saying that Washington was intentionally withholding aid from Republicans in need across the Southeast. The former president falsely claimed the Federal Emergency Management Agency had run out of money to help them because it was spent on programs to help immigrants who are in the United States illegally.

He pressed that argument on Fox News’ “Sunday Morning Futures,” saying the White House response was “absolutely terrible” and repeating the claim about FEMA’s dollars. “It came out from there and everybody knew it,” Trump said in an interview that was taped Thursday and broadcast Sunday.

Before Harris spoke in church, Biden was surveying hurricane damage on a helicopter flight between Tampa and St. Pete Beach on the Gulf Coast. From the air, he saw the torn-up roof of Tropicana Field, home of the Tampa Bay Rays baseball team. On the ground, the president saw waterlogged household furnishings piled up outside flooded homes. Some houses had collapsed.

The president said he was thankful that Milton was not as bad as officials had anticipated, but that it still was a “cataclysmic” event for many people, including those who lost irreplaceable personal items. He also praised the first responders, some of whom had come from Canada.

“It’s in moments like this we come together to take care of each other, not as Democrats or Republicans, but as Americans,” Biden said after he was briefed by federal, state and local officials, and met some residents and responders. “We are one United States, one United States.”

Advertisement

Harris opened her second day in North Carolina by speaking at the Christian center in Greenville, part of her campaign’s “Souls to the Polls” effort to help turn out Black churchgoers before the Nov. 5 election.

The vice president later spoke to roughly 7,000 supporters at a Sunday afternoon rally at East Carolina University’s arena, suggesting that Trump’s team has stopped him from releasing medical records or debating her again because they might be “afraid that people will see that he is too weak and unstable.”

The North Carolina appearances mark the start of a week that will find Harris working to shore up support among Black voters, a key constituency for the Democratic Party. She is counting on Black turnout in competitive states such as North Carolina to help her defeat Trump, who has focused on energizing men of all races and has tried to make inroads with Black men in particular.

On Tuesday, she will appear in Detroit for a live conversation with Charlamagne tha God, a prominent Black media personality.

Black registered voters have overwhelmingly favorable views of Harris and negative views of Trump despite his attempts to appeal to nonwhite voters, according to a recent poll from The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. But the poll also shows that many Black voters aren’t sure whether Harris would improve the country overall or better their own lives.

Advertisement

In Florida, which Biden had visited the Big Bend region on Oct. 3 after Helene struck, the president announced $612 million for six Department of Energy projects in hurricane-affected areas to bolster the region’s electric grid. The money includes $47 million for Gainesville Regional Utilities and $47 million for Switched Source to partner with Florida Power and Light.

With a little more than three weeks before the election, the hurricanes have added another dimension to the closely contested presidential race.

Trump has said the Biden administration’s storm response was lacking, particularly in western North Carolina after Helene. Biden and Harris have hammered Trump for promoting falsehoods about the federal response.

Biden said Trump was “not singularly” to blame for the spread of misinformation but that he has the “biggest mouth.”

“They blame me for everything. It’s OK,” Trump told Fox.

Biden has pressed for Congress to act quickly to make sure the Small Business Administration and FEMA have the money they need to get through hurricane season, which ends Nov. 30 in the Atlantic. He said Friday that Milton alone had caused an estimated $50 billion in damages.

Advertisement

Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, whose department oversees FEMA, said the hurricane season is far from over and there are other natural disasters for which the agency must ready.

“We don’t know what’s coming tomorrow, whether it’s another hurricane, a tornado, a fire, an earthquake. We have to be ready. And it is not good government to be dependent on a day-to-day existence as opposed to appropriate planning,” Mayorkas said on CBS’ “Face the Nation.”

House Speaker Mike Johnson, R-La., said there was plenty of time and that lawmakers would address the funding issue when Congress comes back into session after the Nov. 5 election.

“We’ll provide the additional resources,” Johnson told CBS.

Milton made landfall in Florida as a Category 3 storm on Wednesday evening. At least 10 people were killed and hundreds of thousands of residents remain without power. Officials say the toll could have been worse if not for widespread evacuations.

___
Alex Thorn, head of research at Galaxy Digital, shared a ‘policy scorecard’ based on the US presidential candidates’ stances toward the crypto industry.

The card suggests that Vice President Kamala Harris winning the election has limited downside risk for the industry and would be more favorable than the current Biden regime. However, former US President and candidate Donald Trump presents the most favorable approach to crypto.

Galaxy Research analysts are “optimistic” that actions so far suggest Harris’ term could be friendlier than US President Joe Biden has been.

Major differences in tax and Bitcoin mining policies

The major differences between Harris and Trump when it comes to crypto surface in four out of seven issues: taxes, Bitcoin mining, self-custody, and banking regulations.

On taxes, Galaxy analysts described Harris’ campaign as “extremely hostile,” citing her public pledge to roll back Trump’s tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. In contrast, Trump is expected to bring more clarity to digital asset tax policies.

Bitcoin mining policies show a similar contrast. While Biden proposed a 30% tax on mining, Harris has been much more lenient in her campaign rhetoric. The scorecard rates her stance as “slightly better” than Biden’s but still somewhat hostile.

Meanwhile, Trump is seen as highly supportive of Bitcoin mining due to meetings with miners and receiving donations from them. He has also publicly stated that he considers mining to be part of “domestic manufacturing.”

Harris and Trump also differ widely in their banking policies. Behind-the-scenes discussions suggest that Harris may ease Biden’s “Operation Chokepoint 2.0,” acknowledging the need for the crypto industry to have banking access.

Trump, however, is seen as “extremely supportive,” pledging to end Operation Chokepoint 2.0 completely and allowing national banks to engage with blockchains. He has also voiced strong opposition to a central bank digital currency (CBDC).

On self-custody, the policies of Harris and Trump are relatively similar. Harris has made no direct statements on the issue, though some of her campaign advisors have been hostile toward it in the past. Trump is “somewhat supportive,” having vowed to protect self-custody rights during the Bitcoin Conference in Nashville.

Galaxy’s analysis is based on public statements and reports from sources close to both campaigns.

Bitcoin is likely unaffected, altcoins could soar

Bitcoin (BTC) is notably absent from most regulatory discussions on the scorecard, suggesting it would remain unaffected regardless of whether Harris or Trump wins next month’s election. However, the outlook for altcoins is more divided.

A Trump victory could provide the regulatory clarity needed for altcoins to outperform Bitcoin, while a Harris administration could pose risks to these assets. Tokens like Uniswap’s UNI stand to benefit if Trump brings long-awaited regulatory reforms to the US crypto industry.

While a Trump presidency has “explosive upside” potential for the crypto industry, Galaxy’s head of research sees “limited” downside risk in a Harris victory, noting that her positions on crypto are generally better than Biden’s.

Mentioned in this article
US Vice President and Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris waves upon arrival at the Erie International Airport in Erie, Pennsylvania, on October 14, 2024. (Photo by DUSTIN FRANZ / AFP) (Photo by DUSTIN FRANZ/AFP via Getty Images) DUSTIN FRANZ via Getty Images

HARRISBURG, Pa. (AP) — Vice President Kamala Harris and former President Donald Trump are taking their fight for Pennsylvania to opposite ends of the state on Monday, with Harris speaking in the northwest corner in Erie and Trump in the southeastern suburbs of Philadelphia.

Democrat Harris and Republican Trump have been making regular appearances in what is the country’s largest battleground state — it will be Harris’ 10th visit to Pennsylvania this campaign season, and just last week Trump made stops in both Scranton and Reading.

Advertisement

Harris at an evening campaign rally planned to raise Trump’s comments over the weekend suggesting that the U.S. military be used to deal with “the enemy from within,” according to a senior Harris campaign official.

The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to preview the remarks ahead of a campaign rally in Erie, Pa., said Harris will hammer home the idea that Trump sees Americans who disagree with him as enemies.

She’ll argue that the comments made in a Fox News “Sunday Morning Futures” interview are the latest example of threatening rhetoric from the former president that should concern Americans about what a potential second Trump term could look like.

Trump, responding to a question about “outside agitators” potentially disrupting Election Day, pivoted to a foe closer to home.

Advertisement

“I think the bigger problem is the enemy from within,” Trump said. He added: “We have some very bad people. We have some sick people, radical left lunatics. And I think they’re the big — and it should be very easily handled by, if necessary, by National Guard, or if really necessary, by the military, because they can’t let that happen.”

Pennsylvania’s energy industry and natural gas fracking are also likely topics as the candidates compete for the fraction of the state’s voters who have not made up their minds. Mail-in voting is well underway in the state where some 7 million people are likely to cast votes in the presidential race.

Trump beat Hillary Clinton by more than 40,000 votes in Pennsylvania on his way to winning the presidency in 2016, but native Scrantonian Joe Biden beat Trump by about 80,000 votes in the state four years ago.

Harris will be holding a rally in Erie, a Democratic majority city of about 94,000 people bordered by suburbs and rural areas with significant numbers of Republicans. Erie County is often cited as one of the state’s reliable bellwether regions, where the electorate has a decidedly moderate voting record. Trump visited Erie on Sept. 29.

Harris, 59, in the rally speech will also criticize Trump for only releasing limited information about his health over the years, according to the campaign official.

Advertisement

The White House on Saturday released a letter from Harris’ doctor that summarizes her medical history declaring the vice president is n “excellent health” and “possesses the physical and mental resiliency.”

If Trump, who is 78, were to be elected next month, he would be the oldest president in U.S. history by the time his term ends in 2029.

Harris also plans to talk up early voting during her rally. And she’ll stop by a Black-owned small business in Erie in advance of the rally to promote her proposals to give Black men more economic opportunities and other chances to thrive as Democrats try to energize the voting bloc.

Trump plans a town hall Monday at the Greater Philadelphia Expo Center and Fairgrounds in suburban Oaks, hoping to drive up turnout among his supporters.

Tom Bonanno, who was waiting in line and said he lived in the area, said he believed there was greater enthusiasm for Trump this year than in the former president’s two previous campaigns.

Advertisement

”I’m feeling a shift because the economy affects everyone,” Bonanno said. “It’s not just going to be on, you’re feeling joy or happiness or whatever they’re running on. It’s about the economy once again.”

Pennsylvania and its 19 electoral votes, the most of any swing state, have generated the most attention by far from the Democratic and Republican presidential campaigns. Including Monday’s scheduled events, they will have made 46 stops in the state, according to Associated Press tracking of the campaigns’ public events.

Michigan, with 33 visits, and Wisconsin, with 29, are the next most-visited states, illustrating how both campaigns are focusing on winning states that had been part of the Democrats’ so-called “blue wall” until Trump emerged as the Republican standard-bearer.

Democrats have won three straight elections for governor, and both current U.S. senators are Democrats, but the state’s legislature is closely divided.

___

Associated Press video journalist Tassanee Vejpongsa in Oaks, Pennsylvania, contributed to this report.
“It never did. Instead, President Trump embarked on an increasingly menacing campaign to discredit the 2020 election. With a motley supporting cast of increasingly fringe characters, he careened from one bizarre theory to the next, offering no meaningful proof, that he had been robbed by the Democrats.

“None exists. If you are a Republican, Donald Trump has made a liar of you. He has coaxed and intimidated tens of millions into pretending he was reelected in 2020, and that the election was stolen. ”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
CNN —

In Arizona’s third most-populous county, a Republican supervisor who is responsible for certifying November’s election results has argued that fellow county officials conspired to manufacture his lopsided defeat in the primary for sheriff, a contention recently shot down by independent investigators. Still, when the time came to sign off on the results during a board meeting recently, Pinal County Supervisor Kevin Cavanaugh declared he only was voting to do so “under duress.”

In the years since former President Donald Trump and his allies made baseless claims that widespread fraud led to his 2020 defeat, allegations of wild election misdeeds continue to swirl in key battleground states. So, too, have confrontations over voting rules and the once low-profile task of formally signing off on vote tallies – an act mandated by state laws and what will be a crucial step in certifying the results of next month’s presidential election and down-ballot contests.

But as Election Day draws near, state officials say they have moved aggressively to guard against any disruptions in what polls show could be another nail-biter election – the battle for the White House between Trump and his Democratic rival Vice President Kamala Harris. Those measures include schooling judges on the tight deadlines that election officials face under state and federal laws and, in the most extreme examples, pursuing criminal charges against those who resist carrying out their duties.

Election chiefs say they are hopeful that these steps will curb any post-election drama.

In Wisconsin – a battleground state where election conspiracy theories took root after President Joe Biden flipped the state in 2020 – Ann Jacobs, the chair of the state elections board, said she believes that “whatever saber-rattling you hear will eventually dissipate.”

“I’m learning that there are people prepared to go to prison for long sentences with a misguided belief in conspiracy theories surrounding elections,” Jacobs, a Democrat, told reporters during a recent briefing on the state’s election procedures. “But I think those people are very few and far between.”

Steep consequences

Skirmishes over election administration and certification have cropped up all over the country, along with steep consequences for those who buck the rules.

Voting rights and government ethics groups say they are particularly attuned to any delays to certification that could have a cascading effect and risk states missing the December 11 federal deadline to certify their slates of presidential electors – paving the way for chaos and confusion.

“The sanctity of our elections is unquestioned and trying to stop that can and should have serious consequences,” said Jordan Libowitz, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, which recently issued a report that warned of continued certification threats.

In all, 35 local officials from across the country have refused or threatened to refuse to certify election results since the 2020 election, according to the group’s analysis.

That tally includes two GOP members of the Wayne County Board of Canvassers who briefly threw the Michigan’s 2020 election results into question when they initially declined to certify the county’s tally – which included votes cast for Biden in heavily Democratic Detroit. They relented hours later.

Partly in response to the chaotic aftermath of the 2020 election, voters in Michigan, a presidential swing state, in 2022 approved a constitutional amendment that, among other provisions, reaffirms that election boards have a legal responsibility to certify the results as tallied.

And this year, a top aide to Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson warned of legal and financial consequences for officials in a small, rural county in the Upper Peninsula after two Republican board members voted against certifying the votes of a local recall election. The board members quickly backed down.

In North Carolina, another hotly contested state in the 2024 battle for the White House, the State Board of Elections last year took the extraordinary step of removing two local election board members who refused to certify results in their county to protest the state’s election guidance.

It marked the first time that North Carolina officials at the state level had exercised their removal powers in a certification dispute.

And in Arizona, a state that has become a hotbed of election conspiracy theories since Biden narrowly won the state four years ago, two Republican members of the Cochise County Board of Supervisors are slated to go on trial in January on criminal charges over their refusal to certify the county’s 2022 general election results by the legal deadline.

A grand jury indicted the GOP officials, Peggy Judd and Tom Crosby, on felony conspiracy and election interference charges. They had resisted signing off on the results over questions on whether vote-tallying machines had been properly certified. State officials said the machines had been.

Judd and Crosby have pleaded not guilty, and both remain on the county’s three-member board of supervisors.

Arizona’s Democratic Attorney General Kris Mayes, who pursued the indictment against the Cochise officials, has demonstrated that she “is holding on to a bit of a hammer” should other officials refuse to carry out their duties, Arizona Secretary of State Adrian Fontes, a Democrat, told reporters recently.

Last month, a federal judge blocked Fontes from using that what the secretary described as a “nuclear option” that he had included in the state’s election procedures manual. It would have allowed him to move ahead with certifying the state’s election results, even if a county refused to sign off on its own results.

But the ruling also noted the other tools at Fontes’ disposal to ensure compliance – including pursuing criminal charges against individual supervisors and seeking court orders to force certification.

Fontes said he and other state officials are “gaming out” their legal strategies to respond to any challenges that arise before, during or after Election Day. Additionally, he said, his office is sharing key deadlines with judges to ensure that legal disputes are quickly resolved.

In Pennsylvania, another key battleground and where state officials went to court to compel three counties to sign off on full results in the 2022 midterms, Secretary of State Al Schmidt said his office also is working closely with the judicial branch to ensure judges remain “mindful of the election calendar.”

Schmidt, a Republican serving in the administration of Democratic Gov. Josh Shapiro, said he will soon wrap his mission to visit all 67 Pennsylvania counties before Election Day as part of the push to coordinate with local election officials and head off any problems.

He said he doesn’t expect a repeat of recent certification dramas but is prepared to deal with them.

“The election directors I’ve met in red counties and blue counties and in big cities and in rural counties have been very professional, and I’m confident they will carry out their responsibilities in November,” Schmidt told CNN.

Joanna Lydgate, the president and CEO of the bipartisan States United Democracy Center, noted that, despite concerns in pockets of the country, every effort to derail certification since the 2020 election has failed.

“It is a ministerial step,” Lydgate told CNN. “This is not the place for working through questions or concerns about how the election was run.”

‘No option to vote no’

In Pinal County – a fast-growing area southeast of Phoenix – Cavanaugh sought to do just that, pressing forward with claims that his primary loss, by a 2-1 margin, in the race for Pinal County Sheriff was tarnished by fraud.

At a contentious hearing in August on certifying the primary results, Cavanaugh repeatedly tried to raise his allegations of cheating over the objection of fellow Republican, Board Chair Mike Goodman, who banged on his gavel to quiet Cavanaugh and, at one point, threatened to cut off his microphone.

The retired police detective said he first became suspicious about the primary election because of what he viewed as unusually similar patterns in results from both early voting and Election Day ballots. That has ballooned into allegations from Cavanaugh that workers and other elected officials conspired to “modify the results” and transferred roughly 35% of his votes to his rival, according to a formal claim he has filed against the county. The claim notice – in which he is seeking compensation for his campaign expenses and attorneys’ fees – serves as a precursor to a potential lawsuit, he said.

Pinal elections have had issues, including errors on ballots and ballot shortages during the 2022 midterms.

But officials in the county have forcefully denied Cavanaugh’s allegations and have said they trust the results of this year’s primary. An independent analysis commissioned by the county and presented to supervisors last week found “no evidence of fraud, data manipulation, or other factors that could have impacted the election results.”

Cavanaugh remains on the board through the end of the year – giving him a role in certifying November’s election results in this key swing state. He told CNN in an interview earlier this month that he intends that carry out that responsibility, despite his contention that he does not trust how the county administers elections.

“It’s a ministerial duty,” he said, pointing to the Cochise County prosecutions. “We have no option to vote no.”
It’s been a couple of months since Donald Trump promised to release his medical records to the public. It’s a vow the former president has not kept — which is problematic for a variety of reasons.

The New York Times recently reported, for example, that the Republican, if re-elected, would become “the oldest person ever to serve as president,” and he “could enter the Oval Office with an array of potentially worrisome issues, medical experts say: cardiac risk factors, possible aftereffects from the July assassination attempt and the cognitive decline that naturally comes with age, among others.”

Given the fact that the GOP candidate has spent much of the past decade hiding information about his health, the fact that he said he’d release his medical records, only to reverse course without explanation, fuels concerns.

But what about his Democratic rival? As it turns out, Vice President Kamala Harris continues to show a commitment to transparency that her opponent has rejected. NBC News reported:

Vice President Kamala Harris on Saturday released a summary of her medical records from her White House physician, who deemed her to be “a healthy 59-year-old female who has a medical history notable for seasonal allergies and urticaria.”

The physician, Joshua Simmons, wrote that the vice president eats a healthy diet and engages in regular daily aerobics and core strength training. “She possesses the physical and mental resiliency required to successfully execute the duties of the Presidency, to include those as Chief Executive, Head of State and Commander in Chief,” the vice president’s doctor concluded.

NBC News’ report went on to note that, according to her physician, Harris’ last medical exam in April was “unremarkable” and that all of her routine exams and bloodwork were “normal.”

Such disclosures are supposed to be a routine part of the process, and they were commonplace before Trump decided to reject American political norms.

It’s against this backdrop that Harris is taking the opportunity to initiate a larger conversation rooted in an unstated question: What is Trump hiding?

In a newly released interview with Roland Martin, for example, the Democratic nominee said, in reference to her 2024 rival, “His staff won’t let him do a ‘60 Minutes’ interview. Every president for the last half century has done one — anyone who’s running for president. Everyone has done it except Donald Trump. He will not debate me again. I put out my medical records, he won’t put out his medical records.

“And you have to ask: Why is his staff doing that? And it may be because they think he’s just not ready, and unfit, and unstable, and should not have that level of transparency for the American people. There’s a real choice in this election.”

She’s been pushing this line quite a bit in recent days, including a campaign event over the weekend in which Harris asked whether members of Team Trump are rejecting transparency because they fear he’ll be seen as “too weak and unstable to lead.”

I won’t speculate about Trump’s motivations, but there can be no doubt that the former president is at a disadvantage when it comes to transparency. He refuses to release his medical records; he refuses to release his tax returns; he has refused to provide recent accounting related to his foreign customers; he refused while in office to disclose White House visitor logs; and he’s even pursuing a post-election transition process that allows him to keep his donors secret.

In September 2020, Republican Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin argued, “President Trump is the most transparent president in history.” It was ridiculous at the time. It’s worse now.
It’s unlikely that Donald Trump has seen “The Apprentice,” a movie that chronicles his early rise, but he evidently doesn’t care for it. The Hill reported:

Former President Trump is slamming “The Apprentice,” calling the film about his early rise in New York “fake and classless.” “It’s a cheap, defamatory, and politically disgusting hatchet job, put out right before the 2024 Presidential Election, to try and hurt the Greatest Political Movement in the History of our Country,” Trump wrote in an early morning Truth Social post on Monday.

The 150-word missive, published shortly before 1 a.m. ET, covered some predictable ground, including the Republican expressing hope that the film will “bomb.”

But there was one sentence in the online piece that stood out for me: “So sad that HUMAN SCUM, like the people involved in this hopefully unsuccessful enterprise, are allowed to say and do whatever they want.”

It’s not surprising that Trump would whine incessantly about a movie he almost certainly hasn’t seen, but note the phrasing in his message: The GOP candidate lamented the fact that these filmmakers are “allowed” to say “whatever they want.”

It’s as if some people believe it’s a free country with a First Amendment. What nerve.

The line came almost seven years to the day after Trump declared during an Oval Office event that he considered it “disgusting” that the nation’s free press can “write whatever it wants.”

In recent days, of course, the former president hasn’t just lashed out at those responsible for “The Apprentice” movie. He also has launched a bizarre campaign against CBS and “60 Minutes,” accusing the outlet and the news program of a “scandal” that does not exist.

Trump has nevertheless repeatedly called for CBS to lose its broadcast license — an appeal that doesn’t actually make sense — a point he seemed especially excited about over the weekend. On Friday night, for example, the Republican said “60 Minutes” should be “taken off the air,” and a day later, he suggested during a Newsmax interview that the government should somehow pull CBS from the airwaves.

And did I mention that Trump said in reference to The New York Times: “Wait until you see what I’m going to do with them”? Because that happened last week, too.

So let’s circle back to our earlier coverage and take stock. The Republican nominee for the nation’s highest office is threatening perceived foes with prison sentences, endorsing a “strongman” leadership style, bragging about his support from dictators, raising the prospect of a temporary American “dictatorship,” and talking about “terminating” parts of the Constitution that stand in the way of his ambitions.

Trump is also arguing that his rivals shouldn’t be “allowed” to run against him, targeting immigrants with Hitler-style rhetoric while promising to create militarized mass deportations and detention camps, speaking with greater frequency about deporting people who entered the United States legally, promising pardons to politically aligned criminals, raising the specter of military tribunals for his perceived domestic political foes, and talking about expanding the use of the U.S. military on American soil.

But specifically when it comes to the First Amendment, Trump recently insisted that those who criticize judges and Supreme Court justices that he likes “should be put in jail,” pushed for CBS to be pulled from the nation’s airwaves, made veiled threats against the nation’s largest newspaper, and asserted in writing that it’s awful to see filmmakers being “allowed” to say “whatever they want.”

It’s almost as if the former president were running on an authoritarian-style platform.

In early 2017, the then-president delivered a speech in which he boasted, “I love the First Amendment. Nobody loves it better than me. Nobody.”

It was ridiculous at the time. It’s vastly worse now.

This post updates our related earlier coverage.
At her Michigan rally on Friday, Harris repeated her surprise that Project 2025, an extreme, far-right manual for a possible second Trump term, was put in writing at all.

“And now Donald Trump is making the same empty promises to the people of Michigan that he did before, hoping that you will forget how he let you down the last time,” Harris said. “But we will not be fooled, because we know how to read Project 2025.”

The conservative playbook, put together by more than 100 people from Trump’s previous administration and nearly 1,000 pages long, has proposals including limiting abortion drug mifepristone and removing thousands of public servants to replace with Trump loyalists.

“I just have to keep repeating: I can’t believe they put that thing in writing,” Harris said. “They bound it, they published it and they handed it out, and now they’re trying to run from it? Come on. And so we’ve read it, it’s a detailed and dangerous blueprint for what Donald Trump intends to do if he were elected president.”
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
It was early last month when Donald Trump helped lead the charge against immigrants in Springfield, Ohio, heavily promoting baseless and racist conspiracy theories. Predictably, there were dangerous consequences — bomb threats, closed buildings, canceled events, terrified residents, death threats, etc. — both for the immigrants and the broader community.

The pushback, however, did not fall neatly along partisan lines: Many of those who told the public the truth were state and local officials from the former president’s own party, many of whom urged Trump to stop lying. (He did not, in fact, stop lying.)

Soon after, the public confronted eerily similar circumstances: The GOP candidate started lying about the governmental response to Hurricane Helene, peddling another round of easily discredited talking points and conspiracy theories. Much of the pushback came from state and local officials who, once again, were Republicans.

It was against this backdrop that Trump decided to shift his focus to Aurora, Colorado, where — you guessed it — the same thing happened. NBC News reported:

Former President Donald Trump painted a dark picture of Colorado’s third-largest city at a rally here Friday as he once again claimed it had been overtaken by a Venezuelan prison gang. But the city’s police chief told NBC News that Aurora is still “very safe.”

“It’s not overrun. Without question, Aurora is still a very safe city. It is still a wonderful community that is incredibly diverse,” chief Todd Chamberlain said.

And yet, this didn’t stop the former Republican president from holding a campaign rally in Aurora, where he characterized the community as having been “invaded and conquered“ by migrants who entered the country illegally.

As part of the same remarks, Trump told his followers that local gang members were given permission to shoot police officers. “Did you know the gang got the okay to kill your police?” he asked, despite the fact that this never happened.

Once again, it’s Republican officials trying to set the record straight. Indeed, as Politico reported, it’s the city’s GOP mayor — former five-term Republican Rep. Mike Coffman — who has “repeatedly tried to tamp down fears that his city has been taken over by migrant gangs.”

As my MSNBC colleague Clarissa-Jan Lim added, Coffman also said that claims about Venezuelan gang activity are “grossly exaggerated and have unfairly hurt the city’s identity and sense of safety.”

“The city and state have not been ‘taken over’ or ‘invaded’ or ‘occupied’ by migrant gangs,” Coffman concluded.

He was, of course, directly contradicting his party’s 2024 nominee, who’s used identical words and phrases, none of which are true.

A few weeks ago, before Trump even announced his visit to the area, the mayor told NBC News, “I want the former president to come, because I want to show him this city. I want to show him that the narrative is not accurate by any stretch of the imagination.”

It was a nice sentiment, which tragically missed the point. Trump concocted “the narrative,” without regard for its accuracy. He didn’t visit Aurora to learn the truth; he visited Aurora to advance his lie.

Will the GOP candidate keep lying, now that he’s been to Aurora? As folks in Ohio and North Carolina know all too well, the answer is obvious.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
What would a Harris win mean for mixed-race Americans?

Enlarge this image toggle caption Mario Tama/Getty Images Mario Tama/Getty Images

When Vice President Kamala Harris accepted the Democratic party's nomination back in August, she began her speech by paying tribute to her parents:



"So, my mother was 19 when she crossed the world alone, traveling from India to California with an unshakable dream to be the scientist who would cure breast cancer," she said.



"When she finished school, she was supposed to return home to a traditional arranged marriage. But as fate would have it, she met my father, Donald Harris, a student from Jamaica. They fell in love and got married, and that act of self-determination made my sister, Maya, and me."



Harris' multiracial identity has not been a major focal point during her short campaign.



But it has made headlines – involving her opponent. This summer, former president Donald Trump was interviewed at a National Association of Black Journalists convention, and said this about Harris:



"She was always of Indian heritage and she was only promoting Indian heritage. I didn't know she was Black until a number of years ago when she happened to turn Black and now she wants to be known as Black. So I don't know, is she Indian or is she Black?"



Harris' Black and South-Asian roots are a first for the top of a presidential ticket – but she's certainly not the only person to embody that heritage.

Sponsor Message

You're reading the Consider This newsletter, which unpacks one major news story each day. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to more from the Consider This podcast.

A historic relationship.

The relationship between Black and South-Asian communities in the U.S. goes back over a hundred years, to the late 1800s, when immigrants from British colonial India arrived in America.

Many of these young men took on jobs as peddlers or ship workers, settling in New Orleans or New York. But the U.S. wasn't a very hospitable place for the new immigrants.



"Both the peddlers and the ship workers were coming to the United States at a time when the country was deeply segregated," historian and author Vivek Bald told NPR. Bald is the co-director of a PBS documentary called "In Search of Bengali Harlem," which is all about the lost histories of the South-Asian diaspora in the U.S.



"You know, [the country was segregated] through Jim Crow in the south, but also northern cities were equally segregated. And the places where they found sanctuary and the possibility of building new lives were other communities where you see communities of color. They were Black and Puerto Rican neighborhoods."



Bald explains that marriages between the communities started becoming more and more commonplace, with fourth and fifth generation descendants of those Indian peddlers still living in the U.S. to this day.



Today, in 2024, the number of people with more than one racial background in the U.S. has grown significantly.



In the last census, 10% identified as multiracial. Nitasha Tamar Sharma is a professor of Black studies and Asian-American studies at Northwestern University. She says despite this population growth, the way we understand race in the U.S. has been pretty stagnant over time.



"In the United States, we generally operate along the logic of mono racialism or the presumption that people in the United States identify with one racial category. Those categories have changed over time, as we see on the census, which should tell Americans that race is a fiction."



Sharma says that because there is this assumption of just one racial identity, Americans have a social tendency to believe each individual needs to choose one over the other.

Sponsor Message

Real life representation.

Jaya Krishnan is a 23-year-old from the Bay Area, and identifies as South Indian and Black.



"Growing up, especially in a predominantly white environment or like just any environment, for some reason, I felt like people couldn't grasp the fact that I was both South Indian and black," she told NPR's Asma Khalid.



Jaya says even some friends struggled to understand – or embrace – her mixed-race identity.

"It's like, 'Oh, well, you're Black because of your hair. Or I see your mom, your mom's Black, you're Black. And then my South Indian friends would be like, Well, you hang out with us, so."



Many decades earlier, in 1959, Jolikha Ali was born in New York City. She's also South-Asian and Black, now age 65, and goes by the nickname Jolly. She says on the day she was born, there wasn't even an option on her birth certificate for her father's race.



"I'm from the days where my birth certificate says my mom's Negro, but my birth certificate says my father's white. [He's from] Pakistan."



Like Jaya and Jolly, 52-year-old Hardeep Reddick, who grew up in Baltimore, didn't feel completely seen growing up.



"We were always kind of looked at, my sister and myself, especially my sister, [who] had more African-American features than I did. Darker skin and thicker hair was always kind of looked at as, you know, those not pure kids, if you will, like we were mixed and to some degree, you know, were treated that way."



Jaya, Hardeep, and Jolly joined Asma in conversation to share their thoughts on how Harris has navigated talking about her identity throughout her campaign – an identity that they share.

Jaya Krishnan is a 23-year-old from the Bay Area, and identifies as South Indian and Black.

"Growing up, especially in a predominantly white environment or like just any environment, for some reason, I felt like people couldn't grasp the fact that I was both South Indian and black," she told NPR's Asma Khalid.

Sponsor Message

Jaya says even some friends struggled to understand – or embrace – her mixed-race identity.

"It's like, 'Oh, well, you're Black because of your hair. Or I see your mom, your mom's Black, you're Black. And then my South Indian friends would be like, Well, you hang out with us, so."

Many decades earlier, in 1959, Jolikha Ali was born in New York City. She's also South-Asian and Black, now age 65, and goes by the nickname Jolly. She says on the day she was born, there wasn't even an option on her birth certificate for her father's race.

"I'm from the days where my birth certificate says my mom's Negro, but my birth certificate says my father's white. [He's from] Pakistan."

Like Jaya and Jolly, 52-year-old Hardeep Reddick, who grew up in Baltimore, didn't feel completely seen growing up.

"We were always kind of looked at, my sister and myself, especially my sister, [who] had more African-American features than I did. Darker skin and thicker hair was always kind of looked at as, you know, those not pure kids, if you will, like we were mixed and to some degree, you know, were treated that way."

Jaya, Hardeep, and Jolly joined Asma in conversation to share their thoughts on how Harris has navigated talking about her identity throughout her campaign – an identity that they share.

This episode was produced by Kathryn Fink. It was edited by Courtney Dorning. Our executive producer is Sami Yenigun.
This year's 'October surprise' may be no surprise at all

toggle caption Stephen Maturen/Getty Images

This presidential cycle has challenged the rules and precedents of our political system so often that it’s no surprise it’s posing a challenge for the “October surprise.”

As the month of October goes on, media usage of the phrase only escalates. Yet nothing seems yet to fill the bill.

Now well into its fifth decade, that familiar phrase has become such a staple of punditry as to suggest it has standing on the official calendar.

Sponsor Message

But of course there is nothing official about the October surprise. It exists in the mind of the beholder. And there’s usually room for debate about how much any unusual event late in the campaign really matters to the outcome.

Suffice it to say, the phrase is used far more often than it is justified.

The phrase has long suggested an event or development emerging unexpectedly in the closing weeks of the campaign to upend the contest, flip the script or at least reverse the momentum of the race.

toggle caption Mario Tama/Getty Images

But even if nothing takes place that really matches the description, the phrase gets a workout every four years. Campaigns are always looking for new ways to gain advantage or to cry foul — and we in the media are hungry for new twists or different ways to dramatize the contest.

Thus we have lately heard “October surprise” applied to a judge’s order unsealing evidence in the January 6, 2021 insurrection case against former President Donald Trump.

We have heard the label thrown at the short-lived dock workers’ strike and the uptick in oil prices. It's even been bandied about in critiques of the new book War by investigative reporter Bob Woodward, which says Trump sent precious COVID-19 testing equipment to Russian leader Vladimir Putin at the height of the pandemic — even as many Americans were unable to procure their own.

Sponsor Message

Surely each of these stories has had meaning and effect. But it’s hard to say any has been a game changer, especially when the polls seem frozen in place. The last time we saw the race truly change was when President Biden pulled out and the Democratic nomination was shifted to Vice President Harris.

This month has been unusually heavy with news of war in the Middle East and Hurricanes Helene and Milton devastating swaths of the Southeast. And there has been no shortage of stories and shifting narratives in the presidential race, accompanied each day by a fresh crop of polls from swing states.

But several of these have been part of a larger process — such as the legal system or the hurricane season — with its own rhythms and timetables. So none so far has had the true element of surprise that would seem necessary for an actual October surprise.

Nonetheless, campaigns regularly fling the phrase as an accusation, adding at least a whiff of skullduggery. This air of suspicion attaches most often to the incumbent party in the White House, which is presumed to be able to deploy government agencies and other powerful forces for partisan purposes.



Origin in the race of 1980

That implication dates back to what appears to be the phrase’s origin in the campaign of 1980. Republican nominee Ronald Reagan’s campaign chief, William Casey, had been warning the media (and the voters) for months to watch out for a sudden development — an “October surprise” — that might resolve the Iran hostage crisis just before Election Day.

Casey was anticipating a sudden release of the more than 50 hostages who had been imprisoned inside the U.S. Embassy for a year after the Islamist revolution of 1979. Many Republicans feared the months-long negotiations to gain the hostages’ release would suddenly bear fruit just before Election Day. If that were to happen, they reasoned, a grateful nation might look at incumbent Democratic President Jimmy Carter with new appreciation.

Had that happened, it is not hard to imagine the media frenzy that would have followed. Americans who were alive at the time can easily recall the upwelling of relief and joy that greeted the hostages when Iran did finally free them on the day Carter left office and Reagan’s presidency began.



Sponsor Message

The fear and the phrase persist

Ever since that fateful fall, the memory of the October surprise that did not happen in 1980 has been revived — at least as a prompt for speculation and a goad to disagreement.

Presidential campaigns and the media who follow them have searched in each cycle for something that would really fulfill the fears of one campaign and give fresh hope to the other.

We have seen presidential contests take a notable turn in the final weeks of the campaign, and at least as often we have heard potentially meaningful events described as an October surprise.

In 1992, incumbent President George H.W. Bush was staging something of a comeback in the fall against the upstart Democratic nominee, Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton. Then former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger was indicted for his role years earlier in what had been called the Iran-Contra scandal. The case involved the sale of arms to Iran in exchange for Iran’s assistance in winning the release of a different set of hostages during Reagan’s White House tenure. It brought back the worst memories of Bush’s years as Reagan’s vice president and blunted his late drive.

toggle caption Paul Buck/AFP via Getty Images

Something similar occurred in 2000 when George W. Bush was running for president against Democratic nominee Al Gore. Just five days before Election Day it was revealed that the younger Bush had a previously undisclosed drunk driving arrest on the books. Gore won the popular vote that fall, but Bush managed to eke out a historically narrow win in the Electoral College. Bush’s campaign manager, Karl Rove, insisted thereafter that Bush had suffered from low turnout among evangelical voters troubled by the drunk driving story.

In 2008, the presidential race between Illinois Sen. Barack Obama and Arizona Sen. John McCain of Arizona was too close to call in early September. Then the landmark investment bank Lehman Brothers went under in mid-September and precipitated a Wall Street panic unlike any since 1929. The signs of the meltdown over mortgage-backed securities had been flashing red for a year, but in the election context the financial crisis was truly an October surprise and a crucial factor in Obama’s historic win.

Sponsor Message

Four years later, Republican nominee Mitt Romney was bruised when caught on tape referring to “47 percent” of the voters as “dependent” on government programs. While that story broke in late September it was still reverberating for weeks thereafter, weakening Romney in the home stretch.



Did an October story make the difference?

While late-breaking stories may well tip the scales for some voters, their actual effect can be difficult to measure. It is not uncommon for some political actors and media to call a late-breaking story an October surprise when there is little evidence that it mattered that much.

One such occasion was the 2016 contest between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. In early October much of the nation was shocked to hear the bawdy way Trump spoke of women while preparing to tape a 2005 episode of the TV show Access Hollywood. Major figures in the party such as national chairman Reince Priebus denounced the remarks and privately told Trump he would lose in a landslide.

But Trump seemed unperturbed. First Lady Melania Trump gave interviews agreeing with her husband’s dismissal of it all as “locker room talk” and conservative media generally fell in line. While the release of the tape probably cost him some votes, he still managed to win the Electoral College.

toggle caption Yuri Gripas/AFP via Getty Images

In the same month, however, a different release had quite a different effect. James Comey, the FBI director, told the chairman of a congressional committee that a new file of Hillary Clinton’s private emails had been found during the course of an unrelated investigation. Her emails, long a source of controversy as they involved some official business from her time as Secretary of State, were suddenly back in the news in a big way. By the time Comey announced that no new evidence was found in the emails, the focus and momentum of the campaign had shifted. Clinton would win the popular vote, but fall short in the Electoral College due to narrow losses in several swing states.

Sponsor Message

Just as ambiguous was the 2020 impact of Trump’s personal bout with COVID-19. Did it hurt him or help that he went to the hospital in October with a serious case of a disease he had all but dismissed earlier in his re-election year? Was there a sympathy vote or a rally-round effect when he returned to the White House and dramatically removed his hospital mask?



The campaign of 2024 marks its own trail

This year, there may just be too much happening for one story to be as pivotal as the October surprise is supposed to be.

We have two wars happening in Ukraine and the Middle East. The U.S. is heavily involved and is a major supplier of arms to one side in each of these wars. We have had a historic hurricane season that has spread death and destruction far beyond the coastline communities that prepare for such storms. We have new peaks of tech achievement through artificial intelligence and historic levels of income disparity that recall the “Gilded Age” of the late 1800s.

And we have had a campaign season in which a former president has returned to be nominated again for the first time since 1892. We also have an incumbent president who has chosen not to seek another term for the first time in almost 60 years. And a major party has not only nominated a woman — but a woman of color whose parents were immigrants.

toggle caption Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images

All these powerful storylines have already contributed to an election unlike any other. So perhaps the notion of one late story breaking through and turning the race on its head is itself an anachronism at this point. As greater numbers of voters choose to vote early, especially by mail, the significance of any and all October events is decreased.

It is possible too that the original concept of a blockbuster revelation late in the campaign will be another victim of our age of distrust in the media. Where there were once three dominant TV news sources, we now have countless sources of video and audio with widely disparate points of view and approaches to the news itself. Extreme partisanship and the deceptive powers of AI have made it more difficult for any particular piece of information to be accepted by the electorate as a whole.

Sponsor Message

Nonetheless, the notion of a transforming turn of events in the eleventh hour remains powerful in the imagination. And like a Halloween hobgoblin it will hover over us at least until October 31.
“Old age should burn and rave at close of day,” wrote the Welsh poet Dylan Thomas. “Rage, rage against the dying of the light.” If Donald Trump has ever read that poem — an unlikely prospect, I think we can all agree — he certainly isn’t living it. The former president has become a shadow of himself in the home stretch, with the evidence of his flagging energy and memory growing by the week.

At 78, Trump would be the oldest person ever elected to the presidency, so it’s understandable that the issue of his age has been lurking at the edges of his campaign since he announced his third run for the White House nearly two years ago. It crept further into view when 81-year-old Joe Biden was succeeded as the presumptive Democratic nominee by 59-year-old Kamala Harris. On Saturday, Harris’ campaign released her medical records, “seeking to put the focus on Trump,” according to NBC News.

It’s not just you: He didn’t sound like this in 2016.

Trump’s age should be central to the closing stages of this race, not because Harris wants it to be, but because there should be no debate anymore over whether Trump’s age would affect his presidency. In truth, it has already dramatically altered his campaign — and his staff is desperate to pretend otherwise.

Not that anyone would blame his staff for trying to shelter Trump. Here is a verbatim excerpt from his speech Thursday at the Detroit Economic Club:

Democrats don’t want voter ID. You know why? Because they wanna cheat. They don’t wanna — I say, ‘Ohhh, they don’t wanna.’ When I first — I thought I was seeing things, I thought I was ... like, I didn’t hear that when I first start this who — they’d say, ‘The Democrats will not approve voter ID.’

It’s not just you: He didn’t sound like this in 2016. And at this critical phase of the presidential race, the effects of Trump’s age are visible in every major decision taken by his campaign.

Most obviously, the half-hearted gestures toward transparency about his health seen in past campaigns have vanished, as have his boasts of acing “cognitive tests.” Though Trump told CBS in August he’d be happy to release his medical records, the only recent public information is a one-page letter that emerged after the assassination attempt in July. That letter, by his disgraced former personal physician, Rep. Ronny Jackson, describes the bullet wound he received but has no other details about his medical condition.

We don’t need Trump or his doctors to tell us the truth about his cognitive abilities. His campaign’s strategic decisions tell us everything: He has repeatedly demonstrated that he’s incapable of executing any plan or maintaining any discipline. In a normal campaign, for example, a candidate who had lost the previous presidential debate would leap at the chance for a rematch closer to the election. But Trump has refused to do so, even when Fox News offered to host. As Puck reported shortly after the September debate, “within the campaign, there seems to be wide agreement that with the race this tight, Trump can’t afford to lose another news cycle … and therefore, they should prevent him from doing another debate.”

It’s one thing for staffers to fear the candidate would lose a second debate. It’s unprecedented for them to assume he’ll lose. But that’s what they think of his mental state.

Then there are Trump’s travel plans. In a typical campaign, the candidate would be crisscrossing swing states from now to Election Day. But Trump — who is on pace to hold fewer than a third of the rallies he held in 2016 — is visiting states he has no chance of winning, such as Illinois and California. According to CNN, a source “close to Trump” said that “Trump has increasingly been fixated on this idea that his supporters in states not viewed as crucial to the 2024 election deserve to have an opportunity to see him.” Whatever Trump’s reason, his team hasn’t succeeded in persuading him to adopt a more electoral-friendly approach.

At his age, there’s no point in trying to rein his brain in.

It’s also hard to believe that Trump’s increasingly violent, racist rhetoric lines up with the message from his campaign strategists. Immigration has been central to Trump’s pitch to voters since he first ran for president. But it’s never been this central, even as Trump loses ground on voters’ top issue, the economy. His bigotry — saying Latino immigrants disproportionately have “bad genes” — is more blatant than ever. And his enthusiasm for authoritarian solutions — invoking the Alien Enemies Act, which was the legal basis for Japanese Americans’ incarceration during World War II — is less guarded than ever.

Some of Trump’s advisers, according to Rolling Stone, oppose this turn. They’d prefer he’d “play it safe.” But they’re powerless: His calls for mass violence are uninhibited because he is uninhibited. And at his age, there’s no point in trying to rein his brain in.

Of course, Trump’s supporters don’t care that his own campaign does not trust him to be a functional, competent executive. At this late stage, it’s quite possible that Trump could emerge victorious in spite of himself.

But his age matters, both for the few truly undecideds left and for what the electorate should expect from a potential Trump presidency. As chief executive, Trump worked less than any other president. Should he return to the White House, it’s reasonable to assume his age would limit him still further. That in turn leaves more power for the unelected hangers-on around him. Trump’s first term brought multiple attempted or real subversions of democracy; his age guarantees a second term will bring even more.

And from there, no one will be going gently anywhere.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
Illustration: HuffPost; Photos: Getty

WILKES-BARRE, Pa. — When the Luzerne County Board of Elections finally approved its motion Wednesday night allowing two ballot drop boxes to be placed ahead of the presidential election in 27 days, there was, oddly, little to no reaction from the people who had spent the past several weeks bickering, complaining and even shouting about drop boxes.

That’s because — even after weeks of debate and an hour of public comment this evening alone —“there was never a doubt” the majority Democratic elections board would eventually vote in favor of the boxes, explained Theodore Fitzgerald, a Republican helping lead the effort against the boxes.

Advertisement

“As far as a secure election and all, we’re not confident because we don’t trust a lot of things in Luzerne County,” Fitzgerald told me after the vote.

Fitzgerald oversees an independent group of grassroots Republicans in the county (resulting in the existence of both the Luzerne County Republicans, which he leads, and the official GOP apparatus, the Republican Party of Luzerne County), and he’s one of at least a dozen activists who show up regularly to board meetings to confront members and drag out public comment sessions.

This week’s meeting of the Luzerne County Board of Elections, its final scheduled meeting before the election, was anything but a sleepy municipal gathering.

“I don’t even know who these people are who are talking, and they keep talking about legitimate comment, and it’s to stand up there and say Kamala Harris is — I don't know even what they're [saying] now, controlling the weather?” - Andrea Glod, a retiree who spoke out in favor of drop boxes in Luzerne County

Advertisement

Across three-and-a-half hours, the meeting featured one public commenter calling the drop-box supporters “militant fascists and socialists”; some grandstanding by a national GOP activist who said he wants to turn Luzerne County “blood red” for Trump, but “peacefully”; and a threat from the Democratic board chair to throw out a speaker who argued that elections employees should have to take lie detector tests.

“I’m embarrassed,” said attendee Andrea Glod, a retired teacher from Wilkes-Barre, the county seat. “I don’t even know who these people are who are talking. And they keep talking about ‘legitimate comment,’ and it’s to stand up there and say Kamala Harris is — I don’t know even what they’re [saying] now, controlling the weather?”

This is what election administration has turned into in top swing states, ever since Donald Trump lost the 2020 election and falsely blamed it on rigged votes in Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Trump’s disproven claims made local elections boards like Luzerne’s ripe for politicization and chaos, especially as Trump suggests he will contest the results of next month’s election like he did four years ago if he loses again.

Luzerne County, which has become a national symbol of the flight of white working-class voters from the Democratic Party after voting twice for Barack Obama and twice for Trump, is unlikely to decide the election in Pennsylvania — and thus, perhaps, the country — by itself. But the county offers a clear example of the confusion and drama that’s plagued the elections process in many places of national political significance since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.

In 2020, the county made headlines when nine military ballots were found discarded in the trash several weeks before the election. A year later, a number of GOP primary ballots featured the wrong header, falsely indicating they were Democratic ballots despite listing the correct Republican candidates. And in 2022, more than a dozen polling sites ran out of paper ballots on Election Day, nearly preventing the county from certifying the results of a close election and prompting a congressional hearing.

Advertisement

The district attorney ended up clearing the county of any criminal wrongdoing in the 2022 incident, blaming it on high staff turnover. Luzerne is on its fifth elections director in five years — a woman who took the job at age 26 and described receiving a comment telling her she should be “drawn and quartered.” Elections staff continue to make minor errors that dominate the local news cycle and give fodder to people who want to argue the county’s elections can’t be trusted.

Luzerne County has also caught the attention of right-wing influencers broadly, including Scott Presler, a MAGA gadfly who made a name for himself organizing against Muslims. Presler claims he and his PAC, Early Vote Action, are why Republicans recently surpassed Democrats in countywide voter registration there.

“This board has a history of not making sure that every lawful vote is counted here in Luzerne County. That’s why you’re in the news,” Presler, who identified himself as a county resident, said during a public comment session, which he also used to blame Harris for the war in the Middle East.

“Luzerne County is going to vote Republican this November, and we are going to elect Donald Trump,” he promised.

Earlier this month, the ACLU filed suit against the Luzerne elections board and the county manager after the county manager announced that drop boxes would not be used in the election due to security concerns. That catapulted the issue of ballot drop boxes to the top of the last board meeting’s agenda.

Advertisement

“There are many ways to vote,” said Richard Morelli, a GOP board member who voted against allowing the boxes, suggesting they weren’t necessary. “You go back to before COVID, there was no such thing as disenfranchising. The people went out, they voted, they got it done.”

While Democrats broadly support absentee voting, Trump’s own views on it have been hard to pin down since 2020. Trump had once encouraged his supporters to vote via absentee ballot and drop boxes, before changing his tone and calling it “crooked.” Trump’s campaign, though, now seems to realize the folly in telling voters they shouldn’t take advantage of voting in whatever way they can: At a rally last weekend in Butler, the western Pennsylvania city where a gunman tried to kill Trump in July, Trump’s campaign projected a QR code for requesting an absentee ballot on jumbotrons prior to Trump’s remarks.

Wednesday’s board meeting featured plenty of confusion around how mail voting and the mail in general even works. A county resident, tuning in to the meeting over Zoom, suggested drop boxes are necessary because the U.S. Postal Service and Harris were engaged in a conspiracy to … deliver mail ballots to voters. A Democratic board member brushed off concerns about the catastrophic destruction of a drop box and suggested, improbably, that it would be easy to determine whose ballots had been inside.

Jamie Walsh, a GOP state House candidate, told the board he was against the boxes because both sides, but especially Democrats, regularly cheat in elections — even though widespread ballot fraud has never been proven to have occurred in any modern U.S. elections, and especially not with drop boxes.

“There’s a faction of the Democrat party that wants to cheat. I mean, let’s just face it. Let’s call a spade a spade,” Walsh said.

Advertisement

Denise Williams, the Democratic board chair, pointed out that 20% of people who vote absentee in the county use drop boxes because they’re safe. “That’s a significant number, and they’re not doing it for convenience,” she said. “They want it for the security of their mail ballots.”

Fitzgerald, with the Luzerne County Republicans, described the problem with drop boxes and voting by mail to me using an analogy about domestic violence: “The reason why we don’t like mail-in votes is because of intimidation. There’s a reason why when we vote in person, there’s a drape — because a husband, or wife, whoever could abuse the other, cannot force their spouse, or anybody else, to vote the way they want,” he said.

The county ultimately decided to allow two of the four drop boxes it typically deploys to be used in next month’s election.

It’s not clear there’s an immediate endgame for Fitzgerald and the anti-drop box group. Fitzgerald ticked off some objectives that are unlikely to ever materialize, either because they’re impractical or because they’d violate the law — like making sure there’s a Republican for every Democrat hired as an elections employee. He didn’t share plans to back candidates to replace any of the elections board members, some of whose terms are up as soon as next year.

Fitzgerald and the other agitators seemed to relish their combativeness with the board. “Both parties cheat. All people have hyperbole. All people call each other names. We all do it. It’s not one, it’s not the other,” Fitzgerald said.

Advertisement

At least on the question of how long this battle will last, Fitzgerald and Glod, a drop box supporter, seemed to be in agreement.
LOADING ERROR LOADING

LAS VEGAS (AP) — Minutes after Donald Trump delivered his standard warnings about drug dealers and criminals illegally crossing the border during a Saturday campaign event, the former president heard from someone who was once in the country illegally but now plans to vote for him.

Elias Trujillo was one of several people who spoke Saturday at a Latino roundtable in Las Vegas intended to spotlight Trump’s economic ideas. After Trump finished addressing a small crowd inside the warehouse of a women’s cosmetics company, members of the roundtable spoke. Trujillo began by telling his personal story, how his mother brought him and his brothers from northern Mexico to Utah in 1995 to rejoin their father, who was working in construction.

Advertisement

“We came here legally, but you know, we overstayed, and we were able to make life here in the United States,” Trujillo said, referring to the action of entering the U.S. on a legal visa but not departing when that visa expires.

At least one person in the audience began laughing and applauding, leading Trujillo to laugh and acknowledge, “It is funny.” Trump smiled as he looked at Trujillo.

The moment highlighted the contradictory ways the facts and rhetoric of immigration play in the campaign. The paradoxes are sharper as Trump has simultaneously counted on increased support from Latinos returning him to the White House even as he has centered his campaign on a dark view of immigration.

Trump has said migrants are “poisoning the blood” of the country, called the recent influx across the southern border an “invasion” and pledged to launch mass deportations if he returns to the White House.

Advertisement

The day before his Las Vegas roundtable, Trump was in Aurora, Colorado, darkly warning that a Venezuelan gang is terrorizing a city of 400,000 that has become a magnet for migrants from that country. The city’s Republican mayor said Trump is distorting an isolated problem in the city.

On Saturday, Trump launched his usual criticisms of border policy before pivoting to general praises of the demographic he was courting.

“Hispanic people — they say you can’t generalize, but I think you can — they have wonderful entrepreneurship and they have — oh, do you have such energy. Just ease up a little bit, OK? Ease up,” Trump said. “You have great ambition, you have great energy, very smart, and you really do, like natural entrepreneurs.”

Trump has usually smoothed over any apparent conflict between his warnings on immigration and his support from Latino voters since 2016, when he kicked off his first run by warning of “rapists” crossing the southern border. Many Hispanic voters entered the country legally — or have roots in the U.S. going back generations — and oppose illegal immigration.

The former president and Republican nominee has argued his economic and immigration policies would help Latinos and other minorities, often suggesting contrary to economic data that immigrants are taking what he calls “Black jobs” and “Hispanic jobs.” Around 8 in 10 Hispanic voters say the economy is “one of the most important issues” during this election season, according to a recent Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Opinion Research poll.

Advertisement

Overall, Hispanic voters are about equally likely to say they have a favorable view of Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump’s Democratic opponent. Trujillo said during his speech that he was initially wary of Trump but has grown to support the former president.

Elias Trujillo, left, listens with others at a campaign event for republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump, center, Saturday, Oct. 12, 2024, in North Las Vegas. (AP Photo/Lucas Peltier) via Associated Press

Trujillo described how his lack of legal status made him feel uncertain about what he could accomplish, but how he “had to make the best of my life.” He said he graduated from high school, got married and had two children, now 12 and 5.

He opened a restaurant that he said is struggling due to the high cost of labor and goods, and said he was hopeful Trump would usher in better economic times.

“I’m happy with the opportunity that Trump has again to run and hopefully get us back on track,” Trujillo said. “I think there’s room to make America greater.”

Advertisement

Afterward, Trujillo said in an interview that though his parents overstayed their visas, they achieved legal status. Likewise, Trujillo has been a U.S. citizen since 2011.

He said he has come to understand Trump’s vocal opposition to those entering the country illegally due to concerns about drug and sex trafficking.

But, unprompted, Trujillo said he supports a way for people in the country illegally to obtain legal status, specifically people who have been working and following the law.

“I mean, not an easy pathway, perhaps,” he said. “But there should be a pathway for the ones that are already here illegally, but who have created a life.”

That proposal has been a hallmark of immigration reform policies for decades. Labeled as “amnesty” by immigration hardliners, opposition to letting people who lived in the country illegally become citizens is part of what led to Trump’s political rise.

Advertisement

___
A new episode of “The Whole Story With Anderson Cooper: Why Springfield?” featuring some of the below reporting and much more airs tonight at 8pm ET on CNN.

Springfield, Ohio (CNN) — It’s just past 4am.

Daniel Aula is in his one room apartment praying, thankful he’s alive, and thankful he’s heading to work.

Aula, originally from Haiti, has been living in Springfield over a year now. He knew about the quiet Ohio city through a friend and heard it had not only a low cost of living but also great work opportunities to match.

Why not?

It’s a world better than what he was running from. Aula had been a police officer back in crime-wracked Haiti, until he wasn’t. His house was burned down, he went into hiding, and was told people were coming to kill him.

“I know that. There are two friends who let me know that,” he told CNN.

“My life was not safe,” he told CNN. “I decide to leave Haiti.”

While Aula has found opportunity in Springfield, he’s also found himself in the middle of a bitter national debate on immigration heading into November’s election, fueled in this case largely by rumors and threats.

The city of Springfield estimates there are between 12,000 and 15,000 immigrants living in Clark County, the county that holds Springfield, most of them believed to be Haitians arriving in just the past four years.

The image of a city dramatically altered by immigration has been seized upon by former President Donald Trump and his running mate, Ohio Sen. JD Vance — who have made criticism of the Biden administration’s immigration policy a cornerstone of their campaign.

Trump falsely told about 67 million viewers that Haitians in Springfield were “eating the dogs” and “eating the cats,” during the presidential debate on September 10.

And Vance has made repeated false claims about Haitians, fueling rumors that they kill pets and do not have legal status in the country.

Trump is already threatening to deport Springfield’s Haitian residents if elected.

“You have to remove the people, and you have to bring them back to their own country,” he told News Nation in an early October interview.

Video Ad Feedback He was a police officer in Haiti. Everything changed when he was told people were coming to kill him 01:08 - Source: CNN

A shot at a new life

Springfield is Aula’s chance at a new life. He’s taking English classes, but he’s had so much to learn, namely how to get a job. Many in Springfield have been eager to help him, and to hire him.

Not long after he got to Springfield, Aula started working at Pentaflex, a company focused mainly on building metal stampings and assemblies for safety related functions like the brakes on a truck.

CEO Ross McGregor, whose family has been involved in manufacturing here for decades, has nothing but praise for his Haitian employees. To lose them would be a blow to his business, he told CNN. McGregor hired his first Haitian worker “three, four years ago” not because he sought them out specifically but because he needed dependable workers.

“Retail demand was climbing through the roof,” McGregor told CNN. “We were having a real hard time with people that would apply for a job and then they wouldn’t show up on the floor.”

“Or they’d come in and they’d work for half a day and they’d just leave,” he said. “That is, you know, a real problem when you’re running a production facility. You need to have a reliable workforce that you can count on to be at work every day.”

In contrast, his Haitian employees seem eager to work, he says. He walked CNN through his factory, pointing out work instructions available both in English and Haitian Creole.

“I want to dispel one thing,” he told CNN unprompted: “We don’t bring (Haitian workers) in at a substandard wage and work them and pay them any less than we would any other employee,” he said. “There are no Haitians that are taking anybody’s jobs. I mean, if you want a job, you can get a job. And I just encourage people to have a little bit of empathy for where the Haitians are coming from.”

“I don’t know a person in this town that wouldn’t want to get the hell out of (Haiti),” he said.

The rapid arrival of Haitians in Springfield has created both growing opportunities and pains. Some would come with any population increase; some have been specific to the culture differences and language barriers.

Multiple city and state officials point to the population influx of Haitians as a major boost to Springfield’s economy.

Over the last several years, “We’ve seen more growth than we’ve seen for decades past,” said Springfield City Manager Bryan Heck, including a “revitalization and resurgence of our downtown.”

The growing pains, however, were maybe encapsulated best by Springfield Mayor Rob Rue during a July 2024 City Commission meeting where he told a resident, “We were not in control of this.”

Video Ad Feedback ‘It boggles my mind:’ CEO reacts to Springfield Haitians getting ‘free ride’ 00:59 - Source: CNN

“We didn’t get a chance to have an infrastructure in place if there are going to be 20,000 more people from ‘20 to ‘25 — we didn’t get to do that. So, the most frustrating thing is we’ve got to spend tax dollars that were already in a flat budget, that we’ve got to vote on to try to take care of 15,000 more folks that are here and make sure that everybody has a safe environment to be in,” he said.

Springfield’s growing population has put pressure on services like health care, including wait times for things like blood pressure screenings, vaccinations and more. Visits requiring interpreters also take longer, making lines stretch even further. It’s part of why the state of Ohio helped open a mobile healthcare clinic, to try and ease some of those pressure points. State officials say they saw close to 100 patients in about a week’s time, which exceeded expectations.

“The system’s been strained for a couple of years, we just now have people paying more attention,” said Chris Cook, health commissioner for Clark County, which includes Springfield.

Maternal health care has been an especially poignant issue because of “poor prenatal care” in Haiti, he said. “You’ve got moms who are walking in the hospital that are in labor. They’re ready to give birth in probably the next couple hours, and they’ve never had a single prenatal visit,” Cook told CNN.

Cook said they also encourage new mothers to be part of their Women Infants and Children (WIC) supplemental nutrition program and hope to have appointments within 10 days of the baby’s birth. But over time, waits grew to two months, he said.

“That’s not just our Haitian moms,” Cook said. “Everybody’s in the same line.”

Another major area of concern in Springfield has been housing, with signs of stress dating all the way back to 2018 in regard to availability and cost — years before Haitians began arriving after the Biden administration approved Temporary Protective Status in 2021 due to the violence, human rights abuses, and dire economic situation in Haiti.

City Manager Bryan Heck sent a letter to Sens. Sherrod of Ohio Brown and Tim Scott of South Carolina — then cc’d Vance in July of 2024 — regarding “a significant strain,” regarding housing.

“I didn’t call it a migrant crisis. I didn’t call it an immigration crisis. It’s a housing crisis,” Heck told CNN. “The pace of growth for our community is just — was not sustainable and continues to not be sustainable unless we get some additional support from the state and federal government,” Heck said.

Rent also went up, partly from the increased demand of a new population but driven also by the “greed of landlords,” as Mayor Rue put it during a July City Commission meeting. Prices were also likely affected by nationwide inflation in recent years.

Springfield, Ohio Mayor Rob Rue speaks to residents during a town hall about the 2024 presidential election's focus on the town's influx of Haitian immigrants, on September 24, 2024. Dominic Gwinn/Middle East Images/AFP/Getty Images/File

Springfield, Ohio commissioner Bryan Heck speaks to residents during a town hall about the 2024 presidential election's focus on the town's influx of Haitian immigrants, on September 24, 2024. Dominic Gwinn/Middle East Images/AFP/Getty Images/File

Haitian immigrant and US Navy veteran Jaob Payen listens neighbors in Springfield, Ohio deride Haitian immigrants during a town hall about the 2024 presidential election's focus on the town's influx of Haitian immigrants, on September 24, 2024. Dominic Gwinn/Middle East Images/AFP/Getty Images/File

While Trump has claimed the influx brought “dangerous” criminality, Clark County Prosecuting Attorney Daniel Driscoll, a Republican, told CNN last month that was not the case.

“During the time that I’ve been with the prosecutor’s office, which is 21 years now, we have not had any murders involving the Haitian community — as either the victims or as the perpetrators of those murders.” He confirmed to CNN this week this was still the case.

Overall, according to the City of Springfield, “Haitians are more likely to be the victims of crime than they are to be the perpetrators in our community. Clark County jail data shows there are 199 inmates in our county jail this week. Two of them are Haitian. That’s 1% (as of Sept. 8).”

Andy Wilson, director of the Ohio Department of Public Safety, said at a September press conference, “The No. 1 issue we have in the public safety space with the Haitians, it’s not crime, it’s not violence — it’s the driving, that’s the public safety issue. So, what we want to do is we want to get driver’s education to that population.”

It’s an issue that state officials have found hard to immediately tackle, given that adults in Ohio can test for a driver’s license and receive it without having to go through a formal training program.

Governor Mike DeWine recently directed the Ohio State Highway Patrol to support Springfield Police with traffic enforcement “to address the increase in dangerous driving in Springfield by inexperienced Haitian drivers and all others who disregard traffic laws.”

While some Springfieldians gripe about the effects of immigration, others are stepping up. Cook and local United Way director Kerry Lee Pedraza, who grew up here, today co-chair what’s known as the “Haitian Coalition,” which is a combination of private and public entities working behind the scenes to find solutions that work for everyone in Springfield, not just Haitians.

In 2022, at their first meeting, Pedraza said there were 45 people from different organizations who showed up. They’ve only grown since then, but part of the problem recently is they have not had the “financial resource to help us to continue to do it, and to do it at a speed where everyone in the community is going to feel that there’s some relief.”

Regardless, the multilateral level of coordination across sectors has been “incredibly effective,” she said. “It actually could probably be a master class of how any community needs to come together around, take any social issue, and work together to create a really good solution.”

“Today it might be the Haitian community, tomorrow it could be a different community,” Pedraza told CNN.

Haitians sit down to eat their meal at a Haitian restaurant in Springfield, Ohio, on September 12, 2024. Roberto Schmidt/AFP/Getty Images/File

Living under the shadow of threats

Haiti has been ravaged by violent gang warfare in recent years. Aula’s wife and daughter are still in hiding there, he told CNN.

In early October, at least 70 people were killed, including three infants, in a gang attack in central Haiti, according to the United Nations Human Rights Office.

The UN reports more than 3,600 people have been killed so far this year. Hundreds of thousands of Haitians have been forced to flee their homes after gang attacks.

Given Haiti’s anarchial unrest in recent years, Haitians were added to a Biden-Harris administration parole program, limited to only a few countries, that allows vetted participants to enter the United States as long as they are sponsored by US residents.

Others have Temporary Protected Status (TPS), a renewable program that shields some at-risk nationalities from deportation and allows them to live and work in the country for a limited period of time.

Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas designated Haitians for Temporary Protected Status starting in 2021 and has subsequently extended and redesignated Haiti through February 2026.

Those in the United States under the parole program are able to apply for TPS.

Video Ad Feedback Haitian man shares why Trump’s rhetoric has scared him 01:10 - Source: CNN

“We frequently see people who have just entered within the past month or two,” said Katie Kersh, a senior attorney at Advocates for Basic Legal Equality (ABLE), where she specializes in immigration and civil rights and has represented Haitians for years.

She and her team have been working to provide free legal clinics assisting Haitians in Springfield and beyond who have arrived in the past two years assisting them with applications for TPS, asylum, work permits and more.

Kersh said Haitians do hear Trump’s comments about deportations, and even she “can’t tell anyone that there’s no likelihood that there could be some sort of mass enforcement action.”

However, a broader revocation of previously granted parole or TPS would “be definitely challenged in the courts and probably successfully. So that’s a big thing that we’re trying to tell people, that it would be really, really procedurally and legally difficult for that to happen,” Kersh said.

Still, many Haitian residents in Springfield live in fear of Trump’s threat of removal, unsure over their future and their safety.

Dieff-Son Lebon is one of those Haitians. CNN met Lebon as he got off work at a construction site before heading to dinner at one of the multiple Haitian restaurants that have opened in Springfield.

But first, he made a stop with an immigration advocate to consider his options if there was any mass deportation effort that included him. He’s been a little more nervous than usual lately.

“As I was walking down the road, a white man drove by and yelled Trump!” Lebon said in Creole. Lebon took it as a threat.

“I was scared! Because I was on the street, I was going to buy something, and I was also walking on foot, so I was scared, and I hurried to get home,” he told CNN.

He said he had never dealt with anything like that since living in Springfield.

“It was peaceful here, understand, there were no such things. Everything started after the remark,” he said.

The “remark” in question came during the presidential debate in early September, but it all likely stemmed from August 28, 2024.

A Springfield resident reported to police that she suspected her Haitian neighbors of chopping up her cat after finding “meat” in the backyard.

Soon after, social media posts began circulating about pet-eating Haitians and were even promoted by neo-Nazi groups, some of which have shown up to Springfield in person marching against Haitians being there.

Just days after the initial police report, the owner’s cat “Miss Sassy” was found safe in her basement. While the literal cat was found, the metaphorical cat was out of the bag, and the claims spread far and fast, eventually making its way onto the debate stage.

First Vance’s team picked up the rumors, with the senator claiming, “You have a lot of people saying ‘my pets are being abducted’” and “’slaughtered right in front of us.’”

And then Trump made the claim at the debate.

The claims have been refuted by Springfield officials and City Manager Bryan Heck told CNN that Vance’s team knew there was no substantiated evidence.

Republican vice presidential candidate Sen. JD Vance speaks to a crowd in Leesport, Pennsylvania, on September 21, 2024. Throughout the rally Vance repeated claims regarding Hatian immigrants in Springfield, Ohio. Matthew Hatcher/Getty Images

“I had a call from one of Vance’s staffers and asked, ‘Hey, are the rumors true of pets being taken and eaten by the immigrants in your community?’ I said no,” Heck told CNN. “It’s a baseless claim,” he added.

“To see that continue to be retweeted by Vance himself the next day and then sitting there watching the presidential debate” was “difficult,” Heck said.

Days after the presidential debate, city buildings and schools were hit with multiple threats of violence, prompting evacuations and cancellations of events. While state officials later said these threats ended up being hoaxes, many “from overseas,” they still prompted real evacuations and warranted a beefing up of security both for city officials and schools.

“To have threats thrown at my family and thrown at my house to explain to my 12-year-old why a bomb dog has to sniff our house to see if something is explosive there. That’s tough,” Heck told CNN.

Gov. DeWine’s ‘obligation to tell the truth’

Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine was born in Springfield, Ohio. While he grew up in a town nearby, he took his now-wife, Ohio first lady Fran DeWine, on dates to Springfield when they were both in high school.

The DeWines fund a school in the dangerous Cité Soleil, an impoverished neighborhood in Haitian capital Port-au-Prince — an area entirely under gang control, where thousands of civilians live as a captive population.

DeWine is also a Trump-supporting Republican. All those aspects of his life have collided this past month in a way he simply described as “kind of strange.”

“As governor, I have an obligation to tell the truth and talk about Springfield,” DeWine told CNN.

While DeWine readily acknowledges not everything has been perfect as the Haitian population has grown, he also said it’s unmistakable that “if you look at Springfield’s growth in the last few years, that’s been fueled, a lot of it by the Haitian immigrants who were taking jobs that were open.”

Video Ad Feedback Ohio Governor on why he plans to vote for Trump in 2024 election 01:05 - Source: CNN

He even said he had one employer “look me in the eye” and tell him, “’I don’t think our company really would be here today if it wasn’t for Haitians.’”

Historically, Haitians are hardly the only group to immigrate to Springfield. For starters, “The Gammon House” in Springfield was a stop on the Underground Railroad, serving as a symbol of a step toward freedom and a new life for the freed slaves in America. Some of the first Greek establishments opened in Springfield in the early 1900s, but the area also saw an influx of Germans, Irish, and later on Hispanics.

In 1970 the population in Springfield was around 82,000. The 2020 federal census showed a drop to around 58,000.

“Pumping resources into the community is how communities grow. This is how we grow,” DeWine told CNN.

While Trump’s deportation threat may not be easily carried out, DeWine believes removing Haitians from Springfield would not be good for the city.

“It would be a mistake to kick these people out who are working, who are raising their family, who are productive members of society. I think that’s an economic mistake. I think it’s a moral mistake as well,” DeWine told CNN.

But not enough of a mistake to change his vote.

“I support my party,” he said. “Going against the nominee of the party, I think makes me a less effective governor of the state of Ohio.”

“I think the decision to who you support for president is based upon multiple issues,” he said.

And, he said, he is supporting the Haitian community.

“I make my position very, very clear. I don’t think they should be thrown out. I think it would be a dramatic mistake. I think it’s wrong,” he told CNN.

Daniel Aula’s fate may hang on how America votes on November 5. But he is sanguine about the heated rhetoric around his community’s presence in town — and still, despite everything, grateful to be here.

“The world, it’s like a village,” Aula said. “Like a village, angry people and happy people have to live together.”

“Immigrants cannot take the place of people, American citizens,” he told CNN while driving through Springfield. “They just come to collaborate.”

“Even the people (who are) angry about me, I love all of them,” Aula said. “I love all of them, even the people that hate me.”

Reporting contributed by CNN’s Catherine E. Shoichet, Kate Sullivan and Daniel Dale.
Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.
CNN —

America and the world have a lot riding on who wins in November. So does Barack Obama.

And that’s part of what is powering what people familiar with Obama’s plans told CNN will be the most active closing weeks of an election the former president’s had since his own last campaign. More rallies are coming every week. This past Wednesday alone, he recorded 21 videos for the Harris campaign. More ads for Democratic Senate candidates are already in the can. Content with influencers will keep popping online. He’ll even be doing a few interviews of his own.

This is on top of a range of meetings and phone calls Obama has held over the last year with Kamala Harris, Joe Biden and other top Democrats, first reported by CNN, as advisers, friends and political allies say the former president has become increasingly alarmed by Donald Trump’s continued hold on the country and its politics.

Obama no longer thinks he can get to the people locked in with Trump.

He’s just hoping to help find enough votes in enough states to counter them.

If the vice president wins, Obama will feel vindicated, and in many ways, will be released to more of the post-presidency he’d been hoping for since right before he called to congratulate Trump on election night 2016 — the first time (and ultimately one of the few times) the two spoke.

But a thought has circulated among several people close to the former president, they told CNN: If Trump wins, Obama might be seen as the aberration in the history of American politics, rather than Trump and his nativist authoritarianism. Obama acolytes have spent the last eight years rationalizing Trump as the last gasp backlash to the Democrat and his presidency.

Obama always wanted to stay involved in politics, just more as an emeritus elder steering what came after him, without as many rallies and constant calls to swoop in and save the party. He would like to see his theory proved true that stepping back wasn’t just about making money off of podcasting with Bruce Springsteen or narrating a documentary series about parks for Netflix — as some resentful Democrats came to feel — but about letting new people emerge without his shadow.

“The goal has always been to pass the torch to the next generation of leaders to ensure the party is sustainable long term without him,” said Hannah Hankins, a spokesperson for the former president who first worked for him in the White House.

All that and the survival of much of what he put in place as president depends on his main mission for the fall: breaking through to young Black men, as he is uniquely situated to do, hoping they don’t give up on the Democratic Party in the high numbers that even internal Harris-aligned campaign polling show may be happening.

That poured out of Obama on Thursday, when ahead of his first campaign rally in Pittsburgh, he turned what was supposed to be a perfunctory stop by a Harris office into a visceral calling out of young Black men for “coming up with all kinds of reasons and excuses” for not supporting Harris, abandoning their communities and themselves. He said he feared that they are either being fooled by Trump or “you just aren’t feeling the idea of having a woman as president.”

Obama can still draw a crowd. A dozen of the 4,500 people packing a gym on the University of Pittsburgh campus on Thursday night told CNN in interviews that they still feel connected to him — including a 15-year-old named Kai Jones, wearing a T-shirt printed with the famous photo of Obama and Biden jogging through the Rose Garden. Jones, who wasn’t yet born in 2008, said Obama “has a special place in my heart.”

But if the question remains: Can Obama draw in those young Black men? On Thursday in Pittsburgh, there weren’t as many of those faces in the crowd.

“The fact that he has not been in the day-to-day political scene, people don’t see him in the partisan muck that everybody else,” Austin Davis, the Pennsylvania lieutenant governor and a 35-year-old Black man himself, told CNN ahead of the rally. “You have to think about the type of people who naturally show up to political rallies. It’s not just the crowd here, it’s the crowd that’s watching at home.”

Campaign strategy meetings and advice on Washington

Most of the Democratic work Obama has been doing the last few years has been behind the scenes. A lot has been with Hakeem Jeffries, the New York congressman hoping to become the next speaker of the House whose connection to the former president runs so deep that, as he sometimes points out, he has the same birthday.

After their own one-on-one meeting, Obama asked Jeffries to suggest a few small groups of Democratic House members for trips to his office in the World Wildlife Federation in northwest Washington. The members ranged from New York Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to much lesser known and less progressive up-and-comers, like Washington Rep. Marie Gluesenkamp Perez and Alaska Rep. Mary Peltola. He talked to them about coming off like real people rather than scolding coastal elites and staying consistent rather than being pulled into the whirlwind of Washington consultant advice, according to people in the room.

Several took written notes, including a nervous congressman who watched Obama play with an aide’s child before their meeting started and wrote down to focus on learning how to charm babies, according to one of the people who saw it.

Obama’s session last November with Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and the incumbent Democratic senators running in 2024 was more focused on briefing Obama on their races so he could better understand their challenges and offer support.

“It was great to be able to begin the strategy with him,” said Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey, whom Obama has liked since they were in the Senate together and whom the former president insisted be seated onstage to be in the shot with him throughout Thursday’s rally in Pittsburgh.

Casey later came by for his own separate meeting, as did Reps. Elissa Slotkin and Ruben Gallego, the Democratic Senate nominees in Michigan and Arizona. The list goes on and includes Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro, who stopped by a year before he became an Obama world favorite in this summer’s running mate search for Harris.

Campaigning in Pennsylvania a few hours before heading to Obama’s speech Thursday, though, Arizona Sen. Mark Kelly said he’s ready to step forward and help pull Harris and other Democrats over the line.

Asked whether he was ready to see Obama hold to his theory of turning over to the next generation of Democrats, Kelly said, “Not yet.”

Navigating Biden and coming around on Harris

Obama had hoped to start stepping back when Biden won. Neither president was thrilled with how the last few years played out between them.

Long before Biden’s dismal debate in June, the president had been complaining privately that Obama wasn’t helping enough, according to several people who spoke to Biden. Biden aides sensed a jealousy from Obama’s orbit that they were racking up more accomplishments than he had, with senior adviser Mike Donilon saying once in private conversation, “They need to get over it,” according to one of the people who heard it — and Biden aides hated the Republican conspiracy theory that Obama was actually pulling the strings.

For over a year, when Biden wanted a former president sounding board, he was ringing up Bill Clinton instead.

After Biden’s debate debacle, diehards burned that Obama had left the president to twist in the wind when he could have more forcefully ended the questions, while many Democrats suffering through that month felt he was going feckless again. Many calls came in.

Biden’s dropping out sparked its own Obama drama, and not just because the president’s immediate endorsement of Harris came with the added benefit of demonstrating a deference he often complained he never got from his old boss. While most of the party leaders Harris called that Sunday afternoon, including Bill Clinton, immediately pledged support, Obama held off. He offered advice and encouragement but told her he wanted to make sure the process was seen as legitimate in a way it might not have if he had jumped out early.

Harris advisers knew Obama and former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi favored an open process to find a new nominee. What some couldn’t figure out was how much of that was Obama’s doubts and disappointments about Harris from her 2019 campaign and early vice presidency shining through, and how much was a political calculation that she would be better off if she emerged after a process rather than a coronation.

Several people familiar with Obama’s thinking said that he thought she was in the strongest position starting out, but he believed others would run — and that he was pleased to see her talking that week about earning the nomination even as others didn’t. When the Obamas called Harris that Wednesday to officially endorse, his argument was that he was acting as the closer, certifying party unity, even as some outsiders complained it looked like he had held out as long as he could.

Obama and Biden have spoken once since the president dropped out. Obama initiated the conversation, telling aides to let the White House know he was eager for a call whenever Biden had time, and they soon spoke. It wasn’t the two presidents’ deepest or longest conversation. Obama said he appreciated all that Biden had done as president, and how hard stepping aside was. He said he loved him like a brother and always would. Biden took the call to heart, without hard feelings. He thanked Obama for reaching out.

Obama has had several conversations with Harris, whom he first got to know through an informal network of up-and-coming Black politicians when he was a state senator and she was a district attorney. One centered entirely on her running mate selection, though he was giving his take on how she should approach the process rather than weighing in for one candidate. Others have been to help guide her through everything from staffing decisions to bigger picture strategy. And according to people who know about the conversations, he checks in with several of his own closest aides now helping run Harris’ campaign, such as current campaign chair Jen O’Malley Dillon and his own 2008 campaign manager, David Plouffe.

In both public and in private conversations, Obama has heaped praise on Harris for the way she’s campaigned and what she’s campaigning on.

Meanwhile, conversations are underway to get Michelle Obama to carry through with her own “do something” speech from August’s Democratic National Convention. She’s expected to do an event or two — but not much more than that.

‘He doesn’t feel like history’

Standing in the gym waiting for Obama, Paige Mirsky, a 24-year-old biochemistry graduate student originally from Buffalo, said that part of the reason she was there was because watching his convention speech “made me want to actually do something.”

“He feels like the future,” she said.

She acknowledged that she had been all of 8 when Obama first won, that she hadn’t been steeped in the details of his record in office, and that he has been out of the White House a long time already.

Obama’s leaving office was “a turning point,” Mirsky said. “That was the last time anybody felt normal.”

A few feet over, a 64-year-old physics professor named Eric Swanson who had grown up in Canada before becoming a US citizen said that watching Obama in Grant Park on election night 2008 was “the only time I felt proud to be an American.”

He said he’s hoping to feel that same feeling with Harris. He doesn’t feel it yet. Maybe, Swanson said, Obama would get him there.

A clump of Pitt freshmen found spots in the middle of the floor, waving to friends and making sure they’d still have the sight lines right to the man himself.

“My parents talk about him a lot,” Amelia Staresink said, explaining why she felt connected to a president who had left office when they were in fourth grade.

“He doesn’t feel like history,” said Sara Kulkarni.

With as much as they feel like they keep seeing him, “it’s an active history,” Eve Majewski said.

In the 2022 midterms, Obama’s decision to rip into Republicans as a threat to Social Security pushed the topic into a main talking point for Democrats in the final stretch. With the energy around Harris flagging, the prods he debuted in Pittsburgh go far beyond how he called out young Black men: viciously mocking Trump as an out-of-touch and self-centered whiner, tearing into Trump’s claims of credit for managing a good economy, then finishing with a long “Why would we go along with this?” section about Trump’s division and disinformation that betrayed Obama’s deep frustration with the Republican nominee’s hold on America.

Onstage, Obama was riffing so much that he picked up a shoutout from the crowd about Trump wearing a diaper.

“I almost said it, but I decided I should not say it,” he said with a big smile and shake of his head.

When Obama feels like a speech has caught the way he wanted it to, he smacks the side of the lectern. Sometimes twice, a fast double tap.

Thursday night, when he finished in Pittsburgh, he backed up from the microphone for a moment without doing it. Then he stepped forward again and brought his hand down hard, right in the center.

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated the name of Hakeem Jeffries’ wife. Her name is Kennisandra Arciniegas-Jeffries.